
[Transcriber's note: Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. Characters with macrons have been marked in brackets with
an equal sign, as [=e] for a letter e with a macron on top, or [p=] for
a letter p with a horizontal bar in the descender. Underscores have been
used to indicate _italic_ fonts. A list of volumes and pages in "Notes
and Queries" has been added at the end.]




NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. V.--No. 124. SATURDAY, MARCH 13. 1852.

Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition, 5_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Readings in Shakspeare, No. III.                           241

      Folk Lore:--Burning Fern brings Rain                       242

      Translations, by C. Redding                                243

      Ballad of Lord Delamere                                    243

      Minor Notes:--A Note on Henry III.--Old Books and
      New Titles--Bowdler's Family Shakspeare--The
      French Language--Curious Epitaph                           244

      QUERIES:--

      "Hogs Norton, where Pigs play upon the Organs," by
      Thos. Lawrence                                             245

      Minor Queries:--The Judge alluded to by South--English
      Translation of the Canons--Snuff-boxes and
      Tobacco-pipes--Cromwell--Meaning of Wallop--The
      "Mistral"--Deaths from Fasting--Ad Viscum--Whipping
      Graves--John Rogers, Protomartyr--Autograph
      Music by Handel--The Layard Family--C.
      L. A. A. P. D. P.--Prianho, De Pratellis and Prideaux
      Family--Joseph Adrien Le Bailly                            246

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--The Great Bowyer Bible--Orloff,
      Derivation of--"A Captain bold of Halifax"--Goblin,
      Gorgeous, Gossip--Maheremium; Arc de Arbouin               248

      REPLIES:--

      Moravian Hymns                                             249

      Archaic and Provincial Words, by
      Robert Rawlinson, &c.                                      250

      Macaronic Poetry, by James Cornish                         251

      Young's "Narcissa"                                         252

      Dulcarnon, by S. W. Singer, &c.                            252

      St. George Heraldical MSS.                                 253

      Sterne in Paris                                            254

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Collar of Esses--Quid
      est Episcopus--Paper-making in England--"Mother
      Damnable"--Miniature of Cromwell--Etymology
      of Church--The KÃ¶nigsmarks--L'Homme de 1400
      Ans--Close of the Wady Mokatteb Question--Was
      Queen Elizabeth dark or fair?--Meaning of Knarres--Cheap
      Maps--English Free Towns--Sir Alexander
      Cumming and the Cherokees--Junius--Hell-Rake--Ambassadors
      addressed as Peers--Red Book of the
      Irish Exchequer--Yankee, Derivation of--Indian
      Jugglers; Ballad of Ashwell Thorp--Meaning of
      Crabis--"'Twas whisper'd in Heaven"--"Troilus
      and Cressida," Act I. Sc. 3.--Stone-pillar Worship--John
      of Padua--Modern Greek Names of Places--Beocherie,
      alias Parva Hibernia--Ruffles, when worn--Long
      Meg of Westminster--Family Likenesses--"A
      Roaring Meg"--Lyte Family--Nuremberg Token--The
      Old Countess of Desmond--Pimlico--"Wise
      above that which is written"--Sir John Cheke--Richard
      Earl of Chepstow--Maps of Africa--Lady
      Diana Beauclerk--"Litera Scripta manet"--"Qui
      vult plene," &c.--Engraved Portraits                       255

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, &c.                                        261

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               262

      Notices to Correspondents                                  262

      Advertisements                                             263




Notes.


READINGS IN SHAKSPEARE, NO. III.

_Hamlet_, Act I. Sc. 5.

      "My tables, my tables,--meet it is I set it down."

This line (which might have suggested to our worthy patron, Captain
Cuttle, the posy on our title-page) has, in my opinion, been misapplied
and misinterpreted; and, as I am unable to convince myself that the view
I take of it, albeit in opposition to all other readers of Shakspeare,
is wrong, I venture to remove my light from under the bushel, although
in so doing am sorely in dread of its being rudely puffed upon.

The more so, because the natural hesitation which must be felt, in any
case, when challenging for the first time the correctness of a generally
received reading, is, in this instance, greatly augmented, by finding
that an illustrious commenter upon Shakspeare--himself a great and
congenial poet--has conferred a special approbation upon the old
reading, by choosing it out as an item in his appreciation of Hamlet's
character.

I allude to Coleridge, whose remark is this:

  "Shakspeare alone could have produced the vow of Hamlet, to make
  his memory a blank of all maxims and generalised truths that
  'observation had copied there,' followed immediately by the
  speaker noting down the generalised fact--

  "'That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain.'

  "Now, that this last line _is_ really what Shakspeare _intended to
  be noted down_, is precisely the point that goes so much "against
  the stomach of my sense!"

This jotting down by Hamlet, upon a real substantial table, of one of
those "generalised truths" which he had just excluded from the table of
his memory, would be such a _literalising of the metaphor_, that it is a
great relief to me to feel convinced that Shakspeare never intended it.

In Hamlet's discourse there may be observed an under current of thought
that is continually breaking forth in _apostrophe_. In the present
instance it is directed to his uncle:

      "O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
      That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain!
      At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark--
      So! uncle, _there_ you are!"

Is not all this _one continued apostrophe_? The second line an
admirative comment upon the first, and the fourth line, even in the
present day, a common exclamation expressive of misdeeds, or intentions,
unexpectedly brought to light? But it is not this most trite reflection,
in the second line, that Hamlet wishes to set down. No, it is the
all-absorbing _commandment_:

      "And thy commandment all alone shall live
      Within the book and volume of my brain,
      Unmixed with baser matter--

      "My tables, my tables,--meet it is I set it down!"

_Set it down_, in order that the exact words of the
commandment--subsequently quoted to the very letter--may be preserved.

To suppose that Hamlet gets forth his tables for the purpose of setting
down a common-place truism, _because_ he has reserved no place for such
matters _in the table of his memory_, is surely to materialise a fine
poetical image by contrasting it with a substantial matter of fact
operation.

And to suppose, with Coleridge, that the very absurdness of the act is a
subtle indication of incipient madness, is an over refinement in
criticism, as intenable as it is unnecessary.

Hamlet evinces no semblance of unsettled mind, real or assumed, until
joined by Horatio and Marcellus; and, even then, his apparently
misplaced jocularity does not commence until he has finally determined
_to withhold_ the secret he had twice been on the point of disclosing:

      "How say you then, would the heart of man once think it?--
      But you'll be secret."

Again:

      "There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark--
      But he's an arrant knave."

I do not know whether I am singular in the view I take of these two
sentences, but I understand them as _inchoate disclosures_, suddenly
broken off through the irresolution of the speaker.

For instance, I do not understand the last, as Horatio understood
it--"_There needs no ghost from the grave to tell us this_;" but I
understand it as an intended revelation, begun, withdrawn, and cleverly
turned off by the substitution of a ridiculous termination. It is
_then_, when Hamlet finally resolves to withhold the secret, at least
from Marcellus (when or where Horatio afterwards acquires it, is not
explained), that he seeks to conceal his overwrought feelings by assumed
levity.

Such is the way I read this scene; and, while I freely admit the
difficulty presented in the fact, that, amongst so many acute students
of Shakspeare, no one before should have seen any difficulty in the
usual interpretation of this passage, I must at the same time declare,
that I can perceive no single point in favour of that interpretation,
save and except the placing of the "stage direction" where it now is.
But this may have arisen from the early printers being misled by the
apparent sequence of the word "that," with which the next line
commences:

              ----"meet it is I set it down
      _That_" &c.

It may be observed, however, that such a commencement, to a sentence
expressive of wonder or incredulity, was by no needs uncommon. As, for
example, in the first scene of _Cymbeline_:

      "That a _king's_ children should be so convey'd!"

I really can perceive little _else_ than this "stage direction" to
favour the usual reading, while, in that proposed by me, the sequence of
action appears to be the most natural in the world:--

First, "My tables, my tables," &c.

Next, the continuation of the interrupted apostrophe, which occupies the
time while getting forth and preparing the tables.

Next, the abrupt exclamation, "Now to my word."

And finally, the dictating, _to the pen_, the express words of the last
line of the ghost's speech.

In point of fact, the best possible _stage direction_ is given by
Shakspeare himself, when he makes Hamlet exclaim, "_Now to my word_,"
or, now to my _memorandum_, reverting to the purpose for which he had
got his tables forth. In the old reading, Steevens was driven to explain
"now to my word" in this way, "Hamlet alludes to the _watchword_ given
every day in military service."

It is of the more importance that this point, raised by me, should be
fairly and impartially examined, because, being in correction of alleged
misinterpretation, its decision must have some influence upon a right
discrimination of the character of Hamlet's madness, as opposed to the
deduction drawn by Coleridge. In taking it into consideration, the
following alterations in the existing punctuation must be premised:--

After "set it down," a full stop; after "and be a villain," a note of
admiration; the stage direction "(_writing_)" to be removed two lines
lower down.

    A. E. B.

  Leeds.


FOLK LORE.

_Burning Fern brings Rain._--In a volume containing miscellaneous
collections by Dr. Richard Pococke, in the British Museum, MS. Add.
15,801, at fol. 33. is the copy of a letter written by Philip Herbert,
third Earl of Pembroke, Lord Chamberlain, to the Sheriff of
Staffordshire, which illustrates a curious popular belief of the period,
from which even the king was not free. It is as follows:

  "Sr.--His Majesty taking notice of an opinion entertained in
  Staffordshire, that the burning of Ferne doth draw downe rain, and
  being desirous that the country and himself may enjoy fair weather
  as long as he remains in those parts, His Majesty hath commanded
  me to write unto you, to cause all burning of Ferne to bee
  forborne, untill his Majesty be passed the country. Wherein not
  doubting but the consideration of their own interest, as well as
  of his Ma'ties, will invite the country to a ready observance of
  this his Ma'ties command, I rest,

      "Your very loving friend,
      PEMBROKE AND MONTGOMERY.

      "Belvoir, 1st August, 1636.

      "To my very loving friend the
      High Sheriff of the County
      of Stafford."

Do any other writers of the time notice this "opinion," and do any
traces of it exist at present?

    Î¼.


TRANSLATIONS.

It becomes needful that the translations which are to be copyright
should be accurately made when the new international law comes into
effect. In the _Consulship and Empire_ of M. Thiers, vol. iii. p. 220.,
purporting to be translated by D. Forbes Campbell, "under the sanction
and approval of the author," the following _happy_ piece of translation
occurs:--

  "They urged also, that the Maltese people would offer great
  resistance to the destruction of those fine fortresses, and
  proposed the reconstitution of the Order on a new and more solid
  basis. They had no objection to allow the French language still to
  be used there, stipulating only that a college should be
  instituted for teaching the English and Maltese languages. The
  latter for the advantages of the Maltese people, who should have a
  share in its management; they were desirous of placing this new
  settlement under the guarantee of some great power, Russia for
  example. The English were in hopes that with the English and
  Maltese languages spoken by the people who would still be devoted
  to them, they should still have an influence in the island, which
  would prevent the French from again obtaining possession of it."

The translator has invented a college and system of instruction, because
he did not know how to translate "_langue_!"[1] Thus this important
passage is wholly perverted.

  "Ils allÃ©guaient la resistance de la population maltaise Ã  toute
  destruction de ses belles forteresses, et proposaient la
  reconstitution de l'Ordre sur des bases nouvelles et plus solides.
  _Ils voulaient y laisser une langue franÃ§aise, moyennant qu'on y
  institÃ»t une langue anglaise et une langue maltaise, celle-ci
  accordÃ©e Ã  la population de l'Ã®sle, pour lui donner part Ã  son
  gouvernement; ils voulaient que ce nouvel Ã©tablissement fÃ»t placÃ©
  sur la garantie d'une grande puissance, la Russie par exemple. Les
  Anglais espÃ©raient qu'avec les langues anglaise et maltaise qui
  leur seraient dÃ©votÃ©e, ils auraient un pied dans l'isle, et
  empÃªcheraient les FranÃ§ais d'y rentrer._"

  [Footnote 1: "Langue" means Order of Knights of Malta, of the
  particular "nation" expressed.]

    C. REDDING.


BALLAD OF LORD DELAMERE.

(Vol. ii., p. 104.)

A correspondent gives the first two lines of a ballad called _Lord
Delamere_, and inquires to what political event it refers. DR. RIMBAULT
(Vol. ii., p. 158.) suggests that this song may be another version of
one published in Mr. Thomas Lyte's _Ancient Ballads and Songs_, which
begins differently, and which Mr. Lyte fancies may refer to some
corn-law debate in parliament about the years 1621 and 1622. I have a
song which I took down from recitation in Derbyshire, entitled _The
Long-armed Duke_, but which is no doubt identical with Mr. Lyte's, the
first verse being nearly the same. That it refers to some transaction
much later than 1622 is evident from the mention of Lord Delamere, that
title having been first conferred by Charles II. upon Sir George
Warrington. Henry, second Earl of Delamere, and William, Earl of
Devonshire, are the heroes of the ballad, which I believe to be founded
upon some obscure report of the quarrel which took place between the
latter and Colonel Colepepper, of which an account will be found in the
_Works of Lord Delamere_, London, 1694, p. 563. (reprinted in Howell's
_State Trials_, vol. ii. p. 510.), and also in Collins's _Peerage_, vol.
i. p. 343.; and see also Colley Cibber's _Apology_, chap. iii.

The Earl of Devonshire struck Colonel Colepepper in the anteroom at
Whitehall, having previously received an affront from the Colonel in the
king's palace. He was summoned to appear at the King's Bench, and gave
bail to the amount of 30,000_l._; Lord Delamere being one of his
sureties. A fine to that amount was inflicted on him, but he appealed
from the judgment to the House of Lords, where one of his warmest
advocates was Lord Delamere. Vague reports of these proceedings would
find their way into the North, where the matter would be handled by the
balladmongers in a style congenial to the manners and ideas of their
rustic auditory. Lord Delamere is described by a cotemporary versifier
as

      "Fit to assist to pull a tyrant down,
      But not to please a prince that mounts the throne."

These lines are given, without a reference, in a note to Burton's
_Diary_. Query, Where do they come from?

My version of the ballad was printed about nine years ago in a
periodical called _The Storyteller_, which came to an abrupt conclusion
in the second volume, and is probably now in the hands of few. Mr.
Lyte's volume also appears to be a rarity. I therefore append a copy,
which you can add to this note if you do not think it too long. Perhaps
your correspondent would send the remainder of his fragment, which it
might be interesting to compare.

      "THE LONG-ARMED DUKE.

      "Good people, give attention, a story you shall hear,
      It is of the king and my Lord Delamere;
      The quarrel it arose in the parliament house,
      Concerning some taxations going to be put in force.

            "Ri toora loora la.

      "Says my Lord Delamere to his Majesty soon,
      'If it please you, my liege, of you I'll soon beg a boon.'
      'Then what is your boon? let me it understand:'
      'It's to have all the poor men you have in your land;

      "'And I'll take them to Cheshire, and there I will sow
      Both hempseed and flaxseed, and them all in a row.
      Why, they'd better be hanged, and stopped soon their breath,
      If it please you, my liege, than to starve them to death.'

      "Then up starts a French[2] lord, as we do hear,
      Saying, 'Thou art a proud Jack,' to my Lord Delamere,
      'Thou oughtest to be stabbed,' then he turn'd him about,
      'For affronting the king in the parliament house.'

      "Then up starts his grace the Duke of Devonshire,
      Saying, 'I'll fight in defence of my Lord Delamere.'
      Then a stage was erected, to battle they went,
      To kill or to be killed was our noble duke's intent.

      "The very first push, as we do understand,
      The duke's sword he bended it back into his hand.
      He waited awhile, but nothing he spoke,
      Till on the king's armour his rapier he broke.

      "An English lord, who by that stage did stand,
      Threw Devonshire another, and he got it in his hand:
      'Play low for your life, brave Devonshire,' said he,
      'Play low for your life, or a dead man you will be.'

      "Devonshire dropped on his knee, and gave him his deathwound;
      Oh! then that French lord fell dead upon the ground.
      The king called his guards, and he unto them did say,
      'Bring Devonshire down, and take the dead man away.'

      "'No, if it please you, my liege, no! I've slain him like a man;
      I'm resolved to see what clothing he's got on.
      Oh! fie upon your treachery--your treachery,' said he,
      'Oh! king, 'twas your intention to have took my life away:

      "'For he fought in your armour, whilst I have fought in bare;
      The same thou shalt win, king, before thou does it wear.'
      Then they all turned back to the parliament house,
      And the nobles made obeisance with their hands to their mouths.

      "God bless all the nobles we have in our land,
      And send the Church of England may flourish still and stand:
      For I've injured no king, no kingdom, nor no crown,
      But I wish that every honest man might enjoy his own."

  [Footnote 2: According to some reciters, "Dutch."]

    C. W. G.


Minor Notes.

_A Note on Henry III._--In Vol. v., p. 28., is the Query, "Are our Lists
of English Sovereigns completed?" Some further illustration of the case
of the king usually styled Henry III., to which particular attention was
directed, may be derived from the subjoined extract taken from a MS.
(No. 146.) in the University Library at Cambridge. The MS. is a
parchment roll containing a "genealogical tree" of the kings of England,
with brief notices written in the fifteenth century. On one side of the
medallion on which is inscribed "Henricus tercius," is a brief eulogy of
the king; on the other side is the following:

  "Iste Henricus dictus est tercius quia sic intitulatur in Cronicis
  hystoriis scriptis et cartis non ratione numerali sed regie
  denominationes (_sic_) vel dignitatis verbi gracia si numeretur.
  Henricus filius conquestoris. Deinde Henricus secundus filius
  Plantagenet postea filius eiusdem Henrici erit iste profecto
  quartus. PrÃ¦termittitur autem in stipite regnantium Henricus
  filius eius quia non regnavit, ratione igitur regnantium dicitur
  iste Henricus tercius. Obiit die sancti Edmundi Regis anno regni
  sui LVII'o et sepultus est apud Westmonasterium."

    W. R. C.

_Old Books and New Titles_ (Vol. v., p. 125.).--Your correspondent J. H.
is quite correct in his remarks on the above subject. A friend of mine
lately saw advertised in a catalogue the following title of a work,
_Fulfilment of Scripture Prophecies on Nations and Kingdoms, by John
Hoyland_. He sent for the book and found it was exactly the same as what
he already had, viz., _Epitome of the History of the World, by John
Hoyland_, but with another title. Such practices are neither fair nor
honorable.

    JOHN ALGOR.

  Sheffield.

_Bowdler's Family Shakspeare._--It has occurred to me that a cheap
edition of Bowdler's _Family Shakspeare_ would be in much request, and
might conveniently be published in numbers consisting of single plays at
3_d._ each. This would bring the whole to about 9_s._, bound in three
handy volumes. A new edition might contain the more recent typographical
corrections and the names printed at length, a very desirable amendment.
Will Messrs. Longman, the publishers of Bowdler's _Shakspeare_, look
favourably on this suggestion when they see it in "N. & Q."? It would be
an invaluable addition to their _Traveller's Library_.

    A LADY.

  Torquay.

  [We have reason to believe that Messrs. Longman have it in
  contemplation to produce such a cheap edition as our correspondent
  suggests, but not, perhaps, as a portion of their _Traveller's
  Library_.]

_The French Language._--It has continually appeared to me as a great
absurdity, that the terms masculine and feminine should be applied to
inanimate things in the French language, when common sense is opposed to
such a distinction. I think the reason for using feminine and masculine
articles in conjunction with nouns said to be of those genders, is to be
found in the rule which obtains in the Irish or Celtic language, namely,
that of "caol re caol," _i.e._ fine with fine, and "leatair re leatair,"
_i.e._ broad with broad vowels or sounds. I throw out this hint to those
who are better qualified to investigate the matter; as I feel sure it
would be a great benefit to learners of the French language to have a
clear rule to guide them, instead of the present system, which is very
complicated.

    FRAS. CROSSLEY.

_Curious Epitaph._--The following portion of an epitaph from the tomb of
Thomas Carter, 1706, in the church of St. Gregory, Sudbury, will
doubtless interest some of your readers; it is as well to premise that
he was a very charitable man, as the whole inscription (which would
occupy about forty lines) fully records:

                    "Viator mirum referam
      Quo die efflavit animam Thos. Carter, prÃ¦dictus,
        AcÃ»s foramen transivit Camelus Sudburiensis.
          Vade, et si dives sis, tu fac similiter.
                            Vale."

Permit me to translate it for the benefit of your lady readers:

  "Traveller, I will relate a prodigy. On the day whereon the
  aforesaid Thomas Carter breathed out his soul, a Sudbury camel
  passed through the eye of a needle. Go, and if thou art wealthy,
  do thou likewise. Farewell."

The allusion is of course to St. Matthew xix. 24.

    W. SPARROW SIMPSON, B.A.




Queries.


"HOGS NORTON, WHERE PIGS PLAY UPON THE ORGANS."

I should be much obliged by any of your correspondents favouring me with
their opinions as to the origin of the above saying. Evans, in his
_Leicestershire Words_, says:

  "The true name of the town, according to Peck, is Hocks Norton,
  but vulgarly pronounced Hogs Norton. The organist to this parish
  church was named Piggs."

But in Witt's _Recreations_, of which I have a copy of 1640, the
eighty-third epigram is "upon pigs devouring a bed of penny-royal,
commonly called _organs_:"

      "A good wife once, a bed of organs set,
      The pigs came in, and eat up every whit;
      The goodman said, Wife, you your garden may
      Hogs Norton call, here pigs on organs play."

_Organs_ from "organy;" French, _origan_; Latin, _origanum_.

Now it is evident that in 1640 the proverb was in vogue, and well
understood; but organs were not at that time common in churches,
especially parish churches, and as I do not know which of the many
Nortons in England is Mr. Peck's Hocks Norton, I cannot help considering
his derivation somewhat in the light of an anachronism.

I do not know the date of Howell's _English Proverbs_ quoted by Mr.
Halliwell in his _Archaic Dictionary_. Should there be such a place as
Hog's Norton, or Hock's Norton, is the Hock = Hok = oak tree? Acorns and
pigs were common associates.

The only instance that I recollect of pigs being connected with an
organ, is in that curious freak recorded of the AbbÃ© Debaigne, maÃ®tre de
musique to Louis XI., when he made a hog-organ by enclosing pigs of
various ages and pitches of voice in a kind of chest; the older ones on
the left hand for the bass, and the younger on the right for the treble:
over all these was suspended a key-board, which, when played on, pressed
long needles into the pigs' backs,--the result is left to the
imagination.

    THOS. LAWRENCE.

  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.


Minor Queries.

_The Judge alluded to by South._--South, in a note in his first Sermon
on Covetousness (vol. iv. p. 448., 4th edition, 1727), tells us of a
lawyer, "a confident of the rebels," who recommended that the Duke of
Gloucester, the youngest son of Charles I., should be bound "to some
good trade, that so he might eat his bread honestly." He then expresses
wonder that Charles II. made this lawyer a judge; a practice, he adds,
and doubtless with a meaning, "not unusual in the courts of some
princes, to encourage and prefer their mortal enemies, before their
truest friends."

Can any of your correspondents tell us more on the subject, and the name
of the judge?

The recommendation was probably given at the time when the Duke and the
Princess Elizabeth were removed from Penshurst to Carisbrooke, where,
according to instructions, they were not to be treated as royal
children.

I may refer your readers to Lord Clarendon's _Hist._ (vii. 84.), and to
a letter and interesting note in Sir H. Ellis's _Collection of Letters_,
iii. 329. Evelyn describes the Duke as "a prince of extraordinary
hopes."

Did South, in his reflection on princes, refer to himself? Wood, his
bitter foe, tells us that "he could never be enough loaded with
preferment; while others, who had been reduced to a bit of bread for his
Majesty's cause, could get nothing." In 1660 he "tugged hard," adds
Wood, to be Can of Ch. Ch., but failed: in ten years afterwards he
succeeded.

    J. H. M.

  Bath.

_English Translation of the Canons._--In the 36th canon the record of
the subscriptions is, _Quod liber publicÃ¦ LiturgiÃ¦ ... nihil in se
contineat quod verbo Dei sit contrarium; quodque eodem_ taliter _uti
liceat_. This is copied from Bishop Sparrow's collection. The English
translation, to which subscription is now made, has the following
rendering of the second clause--_and that the same may be lawfully
used_. The word _taliter_ seems to be not rendered at all. Without
wishing to provoke theological controversy, I should ask, by what
authority, and at what date, was the English translation imposed upon
the clergy and graduates, all of whom understand Latin? Is it affirmed
that the English renders the Latin fully, or is the English translation
avowedly intended to fall short? I will not ask the meaning of the word
_taliter_ in the minds of those who imposed the Latin subscription,
because answers might provoke the inadmissible kind of controversy.

    M.

_Snuff-boxes and Tobacco-pipes._--In which book can I find the best
account of the manufacture of snuff-boxes, particularly of those
manufactured in Mauchline and Laurencekirk, Scotland?

Also of the manufacture of cigars in London, the number of persons
engaged in the trade, and general statistics thereof?

Also of the manufacture of tobacco-pipes, and of the "Incorporated
Company of Tobacco-pipe Manufacturers," and the statistics of the trade?

    D. W. L.

_Cromwell._--Is it true that Oliver Cromwell held the office of
cup-bearer to King Charles I.? I ask this question, because at a recent
sale of MSS. by Messrs. Puttick and Simpson occurs this lot:

  "226. Committee for Public Revenue. Order for the payment of
  arrears of annual salary of 66_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._, due Christmas
  last, to Major Oliver Cromwell, for his attending the late King as
  Cup-bearer. Signed ED. HOWARD (Lord Howard of Escrick, co. York);
  SIR H. VANE; H. EDWARDES; JOHN TRENCHARD; and COR HOLLAND: the
  receipt dated July 2, signed O. CROMWELL. Thomas Fauconberge
  subsequently became Cromwell's son-in-law; at the corner is his
  autograph order, for the amount to be promptly paid. July 2,
  1649."

    G. W. J.

_Meaning of Wallop_--In the article of Collins's _Peerage_ which
narrates the history of the "Wallops, Earls of Portsmouth," great and
deserved praise is bestowed upon Sir John Wallop, a most valorous and
successful military commander.

Not to trouble you with more, I make one extract, which is, for more
reasons than one, likely to be interesting:

  "Sir John Wallop, in 6 Henry VIII., was sent as Admiral and
  Commander-in-Chief of the fleet, to encounter Prior John, the
  French Admiral, who, landing in Sussex, had burnt the town of
  Brighthelmstone. The French getting into their own ports, Sir John
  Wallop sailed to the coast of Normandy, and there landed and burnt
  twenty-one villages and towns with great slaughter, and also the
  ships and boats in the havens of Treaport, Staple, &c., wherein he
  acquitted himself with such conduct and valour, that all our
  historians have mentioned this expedition much to his honour."

The Query which I desire to ask is, whether the significant, but
somewhat coarse phrase of "to wallop," have its origin in the exploits
of this gallant ancestor of the Earl of Portsmouth?

    E. S. S. W.

  Winton.

_The "Mistral."_--There is an old French proverb which says:

      "Trois flÃ©aux en Provence,
      Le Parlement, le Mistral, la Durance."

The first of these scourges has disappeared: the third will probably
last for ever: but what of the second?

The _Mistral_ is a kind of whirlwind (partaking of the character of the
African simoon, or of the West Indian hurricane), which pays its annual
visits to Provence, and causes the most frightful devastation along the
banks of the Rhone. It is spoken of by Seneca, and other writers of his
time; and the Emperor Augustus is said to have raised a temple to it
during his residence in Gaul.

Has any attempt been made, in this age of scientific advancement, to
explain the causes of the _Mistral_? Perhaps Sir William Reid, from his
present position and opportunities, as Governor of Malta, may be induced
to turn his attention to the subject. An attempt to investigate the
origin of this phenomenon, coupled with an historical sketch of its
progress and effects, would form a valuable chapter in any future
edition of his work on the _Law of Storms_.

    HENRY H. BREEN.

  St. Lucia.

_Deaths from Fasting._--In the church of St. Mary, Bury St. Edmund's, is
a fine table-tomb, surmounted by a corpse in a winding-sheet, to the
memory of John Bant, whose very curious will has been printed by the
Camden Society. Tradition says that the death of this pious church
decorator arose from the vain attempt to imitate Our Lord in fasting
forty successive days and nights. This tradition has no foundation in
fact, but owes its origin to the figure on the tomb, which would appear
to have been made in the lifetime of the deceased. There are similar
traditions in other parts of the kingdom. Can any of your correspondents
state where, and whether accompanied by similar wasted figures?

    BURIENSIS.

_Ad Viscum._--It has not been unusual among antiquaries of a certain
class to cite the following Latin hexameter:--

      "Ad viscum DruidÃ¦! DruidÃ¦ clamare quotannis."

Two or three times I have seen it accompanied by a general reference to
one Ovidius. But having met with a copy of that author, to which an
index of all his words is annexed, I collect therefrom that the said
Ovidius never expressed himself to that effect.

I should wish to learn whether any body else ever did, and who; or
whether the knave who first coined that false reference also coined the
line.

    A. N.

_Whipping Graves._--Excommunicated persons were formerly restored to the
Church, according to the old _Rituale Romanum_, by the ceremony of
whipping their graves. When it was resolved the dead party should be
restored to the communion of saints, it was ordered that the body should
not be disentombed, but that the "graves shall be whipped, and while the
priest whips the grave, he shall say--'By the authority which I have
received I free thee from the bond of excommunication, and restore thee
to the communion of the faithful.'" I do not find this in the copy of
the Ritual I possess. Have any readers of the "N. & Q." a copy with the
directions for this singular service?

    CYRUS REDDING.

_John Rogers, Protomartyr_, Prebendary of St. Paul's Cathedral, and
Rector of St. Sepulchre's, was burnt at the stake in Smithfield,
rendering his testimony to the true religion of the Catholic Church of
England: he left a wife and ten children. It is remarkable that no
memorial of this celebrated man is to be found in the church of which he
was the rector. Can any of the readers of "N. & Q." afford information
as to his present descendants? John Rogers, Gentleman, of Charter House
Square, was buried in the nave of the church, Nov. 19. 1775, aged
fifty-four. The degree of consanguinity to the former rector is required
for genealogical purposes.

    KT.

_Autograph Music by Handel._--Before me lies a MS. duet in the autograph
of Handel, and also an unfinished "Sonata da Cembalo" by the same
composer. The former piece is thus authenticated by a note written at
the bottom of the last page:

   "This duett was given to G. Malchair by Philip Hayes, Mus. Dr.,
   with a declaration that it is Mr. Handel's _ohne_ handwriting."

On the wrapper which contains the two pieces is written:

   "The two inclosed pieces of music _ware_ given to me by my worthy
   friend Dr. Philip Hayes, with an _ashurance_ that they are the
   handwriting of the celebrated Mr. Handel. The duett, indeed, has
   all the appearance of being the original conception of that
   greate man _pen'd_ by himself."

I am desirous of ascertaining from some of your correspondents, better
versed than myself in the soul-stirring music of this noble composer,
whether the duet has been printed; and if so, where it may be found? The
only means of identification which I can supply are these: it is written
in two flats, and the words are--

      "VÃ , vÃ , speme infida pur va non ti credo."

    W. SPARROW SIMPSON, B.A.

_The Layard Family._--The ancestor of A. H. Layard, the youthful and
everywhere celebrated "Navorscher" of Nineveh, came to England with
William of Orange. He fought under this prince at the battle of the
Boyne. I would ask, whether anything is known of his genealogy before
1688?

    Q. Q. Q.

  Zeist.

_C.L.A.A.P.D.P._--The famous _Avis aux RÃ©fugiÃ©z_, a work commonly
attributed to Bayle, pretends on its title-page to have been written
"Par Mons. C.L.A.A.P.D.P." Who can tell me whether these initials have
any purport?

    N. P. BIBLIOPHILUS.

      Rotterdam.

_Prianho, De Pratellis and Prideaux Family._--What ground is there for
Dr. Oliver, the author of _Historic Collections relating to the
Monasteries of Devon_, published 1820, and the Rev. G. C. Gorham, in his
_History of St. Neots in Huntingdonshire and in Cornwall_, published in
1824, supposing that De Pratellis is the same name as Prideaux? Dr.
Oliver says (p. 123.), Adam Prianho or De Pratellis al Prydeaux
appointed prior. Gorham, vol. i. p. 172., says, Robert de Preus (_alias_
Robert de Pratell?). And again, in vol. ii. p. clxviii., Robert de
Preaux _alias_ Prideaux, was presented by the prior and convent in 1270;
his quotation is from Instituted rolls and Registers, Lincoln Cathedral:
the roll reads Preus and De Pratellis.

    G. P. P.

_Joseph Adrien Le Bailly._--In the choir of the church of St. Sauveur at
Bruges is a monument of black marble, to the memory of Joseph Adrien Le
Bailly, who died the 18th Oct. 1775, aged eighty-two. After describing
him as the member of a noble and warlike family, the epitaph proceeds as
follows:

  "Victime de l'envie il mourÃ»t, en citoyen la calomnie avait flÃªtri
  sa vertu, la vÃ©ritÃ© en a dÃ©chirÃ© la voile.... L'honnÃªte homme a
  reparu, et la justice l'a vengÃ©."

I have searched, but in vain, for some notice of this individual, and
shall feel indebted to any of your readers who will be kind enough to
give me some particulars which will throw light upon these mysterious
expressions.

    J. H. M.

  Bath.


Minor Queries Answered.

_The Great Bowyer Bible._--Can you afford me information respecting the
Great Bowyer Bible, which, I believe, about twenty years ago was valued
at 1000_l._, and disposed of by lottery?

Is it in private hands, or in a public library?

    J. S.

  [The Bowyer Bible was disposed of, in 1848, in Mrs. Parkes's Club
  Subscription.

  The name of the gentleman who was so fortunate as to obtain it,
  for his subscription of one guinea, is Saxon; a gentleman farmer,
  residing near Shepton Mallett in Somersetshire. He received the
  Bible in an appropriate cabinet from Mrs. Parkes, who knows
  nothing further of its subsequent history.]

_Orloff, Derivation of._--What is the derivation of the word _orloff_,
as applied to the deck of a ship of war? The "orloff deck" is, I
believe, the first lower deck which runs flush frown stem to stern.

    W. A. L.

  [Falconer and others spell it _Orlop_, from the Dutch _overloop_,
  a running over, or overflowing. Dr. Ogilvie says, "In a ship of
  war it is a platform of planks laid over the beams in the hold, on
  which the cables are usually coiled. It contains also sail-rooms,
  carpenters' cabins, and other apartments. Also, a tier of beams
  below the lower deck for a like purpose. In three-decked ships the
  second and lowest decks are sometimes called _orlops_."]

"_A Captain bold of Halifax._"--Byron says, in a note somewhere, that
many of the modern Greek poems are in the metre of the English ballad:

      "A captain bold of Halifax, that lived in country quarters."

The same may be said of a metre much used Terence and Plautus.

Where is this ballad to be found?

    ED. G. JACKSON.

  Saffron Walden.

  [Though we cannot point where this song, written by George Colman,
  and known as "Unfortunate Miss Bailey," is to be met with, we can
  refer our correspondent to a clever Latin version of it by the
  Rev. G. H. Glasse, printed in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ for
  August, 1805, which commences--

      "Seduxit miles virginem, receptus in hybernis,
      PrÃ¦cipitans quÃ¦ laqueo se transtulit Avernis."

  There is also in the same magazine a French version which runs--

      "Un capitaine hardi d'Halifax, demeurant Ã  son quartier,
      SÃ©duit une fille qui se pendit, un lundi avec sa jarretiÃ¨re," &c.]

_Goblin, Gorgeous, Gossip._--May I ask the derivation of the following
English words,--_Goblin_, _Gorgeous_, _Gossip_?

    J. G. T.

  [_Goblin_ is derived from the low Latin _Gobelinus_; see Ducange,
  who defines it, "DÃ¦mon, qui vulgo _Faunus_, Gallis, _Gobelin
  Folastre_, German, _Kobold_," and quotes as his authority
  Ordericus Vitalis.

  _Gorgeous_, according to Skinner, is from the French _Gorgias_,
  probably from _Gorge_, and transferred from the palate to the eye.
  No such word as _Gorgias_ is, however, to be found in Roquefort's
  _Glossaire_.

  _Gossip_ is from the Anglo-Saxon _God-sibbe_, "cognatus in Deo."
  Nares in his _Glossary_ furnishes the following apt illustration
  of it: "Our Christian ancestors, understanding a spiritual
  affinity to grow between the parents and such as undertooke for
  the child at baptism, called each other by the name of _God-sib_,
  that is, of kin together through God; and the child, in like
  manner, called such his godfathers and godmothers."--_Verstegan_,
  p. 223.]

_Maheremium, Arc de Arbouin._--In a survey of the castle of Launceston
made in the 11 Edw. III., occurs the following passage: "Una [p=]va
capella quar pietes sunt de maheremio et plaustro et maheremi[=u] inde
fere disjungit."

Will any of your readers kindly inform an unskilled person the meaning
of this description?

The same record contains some notable instances of jocular tenures, such
as "ccc volucr's quÃ¦ voc'r _poffouns_," from the holder of the Scilly
islands; and "un arc' de arbouin," presumed to be a bow of laburnum
wood, from the town of Truro.

    S. R. P.

  Launceston.

  [The meaning of the first passage quoted by our correspondent is
  clearly, "una parva capella quarum parietes sunt de _maheremio_ et
  plastro, et maheremium inde fere disjungitur," _i.e._ "one small
  chapel whose walls are of timber and plaster (or, as we say, built
  of lath and plaster), and the timbers thereof for the most part
  disjointed." Under the word _Materia_, Ducange gives MÃ¦remium,
  Maheremium, and many other forms of the word, which is used for
  timber.

  _Un arc de Arbouin._--If our correspondent will refer to Ducange
  sub _Arcus_, he will find him, sub "Arcus de Aubour," citing
  _Monast. Ang._, tom. ii. p. 602., and explaining it, "arcus
  bellici species. Regestum Philippi Augusti, fol. 159. Habet
  sagittam et arcum de aubour cum corda." He next cites _Le Roman de
  Garin_ (MS.):

      "Arc d'Aubour porte et sajetes d'acier," &c.

  A learned friend whom we have consulted reminds us that besides
  the common Laburnum, which it is obvious could not be the wood
  referred to, there is another sort known to our gardeners as
  "Cytisus Alpinus," Scotch Laburnum, which grows into an actual
  tree, and supplies the hard black wood used by the French as
  ebony, and called by them False Ebony. It is of notorious
  hardness, and would have done well for bows. It is a native of
  DauphinÃ©, and indigenous also in the Alps, and, even if unknown in
  England in the reign of Edward III., was probably used in the
  Alpine countries for bows, and possibly imported into England for
  the same purpose.]




Replies.


MORAVIAN HYMNS.

(Vol. v., pp. 30. 113.)

As no reply has been given to your various correspondents on the above
subject by one of the Brethren's church, permit a friend to give a few
particulars with which he has become acquainted.

The first _authorised_ English edition of the Moravian hymn-book is that
of 1754, in the preface to which it is stated, that though there had
been some English Collections of Hymns, partly original, and partly
translations from the German, in use among the societies in union with
the Brethren's church, "these were never regularly authorised, nor
always passably reviewed." This book is a bulky 8vo.: it is in two
parts; the first consisting of 380 pages, and the second of upwards of
400; together containing about 1200 hymns and Scripture anthems. The
next edition appeared in 1769; and a third twenty years later. There
have been several editions during the present century, in 8vo., 12mo.,
and 18mo., the last of which was published in 1819; and the preface
states that the whole of the hymns had been revised by "Brother James
Montgomery" of Sheffield.

To the inquiry of C. B. as to the honesty of _Rimius_, I would refer him
to an excellent essay by the Rev. P. Latrobe, appended to Jackson's
translation of the _Life of Count Zinzendorf_, by Spangenberg. (London,
1838.)

The memory of your Thurles correspondent is at fault, as may be
supposed, from a twenty-five years' recollection. Bishop Gambold could
not have published a Moravian hymn-book in 1738, for he did not join the
Brethren's church till November, 1742; nor was he consecrated a bishop
till 1754.--See his Life, appended to his _Works_, printed by S. Hazard,
of Bath, 1789.

When Southey's animadversions appeared, they were replied to by "William
Okely, M.D., Presbyter of the Brethren's Church, and Minister of their
Congregation at Bristol," in a letter written in a good-humoured style,
yet caustic withal. Unfortunately, as long as Southey's work lasts the
poison will remain, while the antidote will be forgotten. The Doctor
observes:

  "What could possibly induce you, with such ill-judged eagerness,
  to rake into the kennels of oblivion? Why do you exhibit among
  your authorities the publications of such a vile fellow as Rimius?
  Was you not informed that he wrote with all the rancour of a
  renegado, and all the spite of an enemy? Is such a man proper to
  be publicly called forth as a witness against a church which he
  had deserted from no excess of virtue; against a church which,
  yourself being judge, has, by its silent but honorable exertions,
  first glorified God among the heathen, and then stimulated the
  rest of the Christian world to engage in similar attempts; against
  a church which, according to your own representations, possesses
  in herself the rare principle of gradual melioration, and, by a
  constant course of good living, has, in the face of watchful
  enemies, been able to rise superior to the consequences of former
  acknowledged indiscretions in language? Did you know that those
  writings were sinking fast into deserved neglect? That the copies
  had become so rare, that it was scarcely possible to obtain one?
  What merit, I ask you, is there in such publications, that you
  should thus studiously fish them out of the mud which was already
  closing over them, and after carefully scraping off the filth and
  mould which they had contracted, spread over them a coating of
  your own poetical varnish?...

  "What motive shall we assign for your conduct? You could not have
  intended to warn the Christian world against indulging in similar
  imprudences; for you well know that in the present day, society
  has not the smallest tendency that way. You could not mean to warn
  the Brethren against the recurrence of the same absurdities; for
  you acknowledge yourself that they have already for a long period
  risen superior to them; and instead of the least tendency to
  relapse, they have repeatedly and publicly confessed their
  mistake, and have suffered so much, and such often unmerited
  obloquy, on account of their long-exploded phraseology, that they
  are more likely in future to keep too far within bounds from over
  caution, than once more wildly to overleap them.

  "The only way to account for your conduct in this respect, is to
  suppose it owing entirely to inadvertence. You were merely amusing
  yourself, like the boys in the fable, unmindful that your sport
  might perhaps prove death to a set of poor frogs. But ought you
  not to have remembered the golden rule of Christ, never to do unto
  others what you would not choose to have done to yourself? Are you
  not still smarting under the blows you so lately received from the
  battle-axe of Wat Tyler? Believe me, sir, communities have feeling
  as well as individuals. In the days of your ignorance, as you will
  now call them, you wrote what you are at present ashamed of. To
  have composed Wat Tyler, you feel to be little congenial with the
  spirit that ought to dwell in a poet-laureate. When that
  unfortunate effusion of your pen was officiously dragged into
  light, did it not touch you to the quick? And why? Because you
  repented that you had ever written it. _We_ repent of having
  written and said those things which occasioned Rimius' trumpet to
  sound. We have repeatedly declared that we do repent, and our
  conduct has proved the truth of our declaration. Must we not,
  therefore, feel pain at seeing our old delinquencies, long
  forgiven and forgotten, once more coupled with our name by a man
  of your respectable character and abilities? Is not the pain we
  feel the very impress of what you have felt, and still feel, on
  the score of Wat Tyler?"

  From a Pamphlet printed at Bristol, 1820.

    SIGMA.


ARCHAIC AND PROVINCIAL WORDS.

(Vol. v., p. 173.)

In pursuance of my recommendation I now send to "N. & Q." the following
provincial and technical words, as taken from the published evidence
given before the coroner at the inquest on the Holmefirth catastrophe.
Technical names have been there used, which are either strange or
unknown even to many engineers, and which no dictionary that I am
acquainted with contains. The inquiry is, however, one of such general
interest at this time, as connected with the recent fearful loss of
life, and enormous destruction of property, that I also give some words,
the meaning of which is not so obscure. The names of the reservoir which
was bursted, and of the village which suffered most damage, may be taken
first.

_Bilberry Reservoir_: Bilberry is the local name of a berry
growing on a heath shrub; a species of _Vacci'nium_: the
genus consists of about fifty species. This berry, in England,
is known as wimberry, blueberry, blaeberry, blae, whortleberry,
whort and huckleberry; Saxon--_heort-berg_, hartberry;
German--_heidel-beere_, heathberry; Dutch--_blaauwbes_, blueberry.
The reservoir, no doubt, covered a site on which _Vacci'nium
Myrtillus_, the common _bilberries_, grew.

_Holmefirth_: this name may be from _holm_, the _Ilex_, the evergreen
oak; or _holm_, a tract of flat rich land on the bank of a brook or
river. _Frith_, a passage or narrow channel; or _frith_, a kind of
"_weir_" for catching fish.

_Greenhowlers_: the name of a place where one of the witnesses resides.
_Howler_, or Owler, _Alnus glutinosa_, the common alder, a tree or shrub
growing in damp places, in plantations and hedges, mistaken by the
ignorant for the hazel. To send a boy "nutting amongst the _howlers_,"
is to put him upon a fool's task. This word is common in Lancashire and
Yorkshire.

_Fall_ is applied to a number of trees cut down.

_Fresh_: a flood of water from heavy rain.

_Drift_: a small tunnel made for mining or engineering purposes.

_Drift_, in mechanics, a piece of steel or iron used to _back_ a bolt,
or to widen a bolt-hole.

_Dyke_: a small water-course or river.

_Dyke_, in geology, a protruded wall of basalt or whin rock.

_Goit_: a small artificial water-course leading to a mill or reservoir.

_Runs_: small dykes.

_Bye-wash_: an artificial water-course, to allow of the escape of flood
waters from a reservoir.

_Rag_: a term for _shale_. In geology, thin-bedded, slaty strata.

_Sludge_ or _Sludgy_: mud or muddy.

_Puddle_: prepared clay, tempered to form a wall in a reservoir bank, or
a lining to resist water.

_Puddle-bank_, _Puddle-wall_, and _Puddle-dyke_ mean the same.

_Culvert_, _Sewer_, and _Sough_ mean almost the same; an arched channel
of stone or brick for water or refuse to pass through. The first belongs
more properly to water-works; the two latter are synonyms applied to
town drainage, "_Sough_" being Lancashire.

_Shuttle_, _Sluice_, _Valve_, _Clough_, _Paddle_: these five names are
synonyms; they mean that portion of the apparatus which _slides_, or is
drawn up and let down, to inclose or let out the water of an artificial
stream or reservoir.

_Swallow_: the inner portion of the culvert, or _the throat_ which leads
from the inner side of the reservoir to the "_shuttle_," the outer
portion being the supply-culvert.

_Valve_: an apparatus to retain or let out water, steam, &c. A valve may
slide as the _shuttle_, _paddle_, or _sluice_ must do; or it may rise
with a spindle, vertically, as in the safety-valve of a steam boiler; or
may move on spindles or a hinge, as in some large pumps; or be in the
form of a ball, and play loose in a case, as in a fire-engine pump:
there are other forms of _valves_. _Throttle-valve_, a valve fixed in
the steam-pipe of an engine, to which the _governor_ is attached, to
_throttle_ or reduce the supply of steam to the cylinder. In some
engines, as the locomotive, there is no governor motion, and the
_throttle-valve_ is consequently used by hand.

_Waste-pit_: a vertical pit or well, leading from the "_overflow_" on
the embankment into the supply; or, in this case, the "_waste culvert_."

_Drawer_: the man employed to draw water from the reservoir by raising
the "_shuttle_."

Such is a brief explanation of some of the provincial and technical
words used in the Holmefirth inquiry; and I think some of the readers of
"N. & Q." will have a right to say that a process of desynonymising is
required. So many names for the same thing, unless they are all
understood, generally lead to confusion.

    ROBERT RAWLINSON.

In the neighbourhood of Canterbury we have the following.

_Nail-bourn_ is the name given to an intermittent land-spring, showing
itself at uncertain intervals. There is one in the parish of Petham,
another near Sir John Honywood's at Evington, and a third at Barham.

_To chastise_ is commonly used in the sense of _to tax_, or _to charge_,
a man; and is probably a mere corruption of _to catechise_.

_Gazel_ is the Kentish word for the black currant.

To get _lucker_ means to get loose or flabby.

To _terrify_ is used almost universally for to tease, to irritate.

    Î¦.

I beg to forward for "N. & Q.," according to the suggestion of MR.
RAWLINSON, a few provincialisms. I know not whether my orthography is
correct, as I have never seen the words written, and therefore only
spell them according to the sound.

_Critch_ (Hants): any earthenware vessel; a jar.

_Dillijon_: a heavy two-wheeled cart. This word's similarity to the
French _diligence_ is apparent. I have only heard it at Fullerton, a
secluded spot in Hampshire.

_Rattlemice_[3]: bats.

_Scug_[4] (Hants): a squirrel. "Let's go scug-hunting" is a common
phrase.

_Yesses_ (Dorsetshire): earth-worms.

  [Footnotes 3+4: [The words thus marked will be found in Halliwell;
  where we also read _Esses_, large worms (Kent).--ED.]]

    UNICORN.


MACARONIC POETRY.

(Vol. v., p. 166.)

In the "Notes on Books" references are made to Mr. Sandys' _Specimens of
Macaronic Poetry_, and to M. Octave Delepierre's _MacaronÃ©ana_. This
latter work I have not yet seen, but if it does not contain the
following specimen which I recollect reading many years ago in a costly
work, _Wild Sports of the East_, but which I have not since seen, I
think its insertion may amuse the readers of "N. & Q.":

      "Arma virumque cano qui primo solebo peeping
      Jam nunc cum tabbynox languet to button her eyelids
      Cum pointers et spaniels campos sylvasque pererrant
      Vos mihi--Brontothesi over arms small and great dominantes
      Date spurs to dull poet qui dog Latin carmina condit
      Artibus atque novis audax dum sportsman I follow
      Per stubbles et turnips et tot discrimina rerum
      Dum partridge with popping terrificare minantur
      Pauci namque valent a feather tangere plumbo
      Carmina si hang fire discharge them bag piping Apollo
      Te quoque magne cleator, te memorande precanur
      Jam nunc thy fame gallops super Garamantos et Indos
      Nam nabobs nil nisi de brimstone et charcoal loquentur
      Horriferifizque 'Tippoo' sulphurea, sustinet arma
      Induit ecce shooter tuncam made of meat marble drugget
      QuÃ¦ bene convenient defluxit to the waistband of breeches
      Nunc paper et powder et silices popped in the side pocket
      Immemor haud shot bag graditur comitatus two pointers
      Mellorian retinens tormentum dextra bibarelled
      En stat staunch dog Dingo haud aliter quam steady guide post
      Proximus atque Pero per stat si ponere juxta
      With gun cocked and levelled et Ã¦va lumine clauso
      Nunc avicida resolves haud double strong parcere powder
      Vos teneri yelpers vos grandivique parentes
      Nunc palsy pate Jove orate to dress to the left hand
      Et Veneri tip the wink like a shot to skim down ab alto
      Mingere per touch hole totamque madesceri priming
      Nunc lugite dire nunc sportsman plangite palmas
      Ex silis ecce lepus from box cum thistle aperto
      Bang bellowed both barrels, heu! pronus sternitur each dog
      Et puss in the interim creeps away sub tegmine thorn bush."

These verses I have dictated from memory after forty years, and there
may be some verbal inaccuracies. The name of "Tippoo" seems to point out
their Eastern origin, but I am not certain of the _exact title_ of the
work from which I quote them, and I am indebted to "N. & Q." for the
name of Mr. Sandys as the author of _Specimens of Macaronic Poems_. In
my copy there is no indication of the author. Was there a second
edition?

    JAMES CORNISH.


YOUNG'S "NARCISSA."

(Vol. iii., p. 422.)

The inquiry by J. M. relative to the authority possessed by the letter
quoted from the _Evangelical Magazine_ for Nov. 1797, may be fairly
answered by a reference to the letter in the magazine alluded to.

It is appended as a note to a "Memoir of the late Mr. Mouncher of
Southampton, written by the Rev. Mr. Kingsbury." The letter itself was
written from Montpellier in 1789, by Mr. Walter Taylor to his sister
Mrs. Mouncher; and, from the position of all those parties, would appear
to be deserving of credit as far as it goes.

It shows that Mr. W. Taylor, and others, conversed with the gardener of
the "King's Garden;" and from him (son of the former gardener) heard
that about forty-five years before Dr. Young had bribed the then
under-gardener to allow him to bury "Narcissa," and would thus prove
that the tradition existed at that time at Montpellier.

There is also in a retired part of the Botanic Garden (established by
Henry IV.) a stone bearing an inscription to "Narcissa," as mentioned in
Murray's _Hand-Book_, placed there probably in consequence of that
tradition. Moreover, it is believed, in the family of a gentleman of
Montpellier, that his maternal grandfather saw Dr. Young and his
step-daughter at Montpellier about the year 1741; that the lady died
there, and was buried, as is stated, in the garden; that however it was
not Mrs. Temple, but a younger sister of hers.

It appears from records in this country, that Lady Elizabeth Lee, by her
first marriage, had one son and two daughters. The son was buried at St.
Mary's-le-Strand in 1743; the elder daughter married Henry Temple, son
of Viscount Palmerston, and it appears died in France (perhaps at Lyons)
in 1736; the younger, Caroline, married Captain, afterwards General
Haviland, and died without issue. The General died at Penn in
Buckinghamshire in 1784; but no record relating to his first wife, Miss
Caroline Lee, is to be found there.

Such record, if found in any parish in England, would greatly tend to
decide the question. Possibly some correspondent may be in a position to
ascertain whether such record exists.

Lady Elizabeth had by her marriage with Dr. Young, a son only; it could
not, therefore, be a daughter of Young's who died at Montpellier.

    D. S.


DULCARNON.

(Vol. i., p. 254.; Vol. v., p. 180.)

Why this word should have "set all editors of Chaucer at defiance" is
not very apparent, for he himself sufficiently explains its meaning by
the context. The passage in which it occurs is in _Troylus and
Creseyde_, b. iii. 931. seq. thus:

      "Creseyde answerde, As wisely God at reste
      My soule bringe, as me is for him wo,
      And eme, iwys, fayne wolde I dÃ´ne the best,
      If that I a grace had for to do so.
      But whether that ye dwell, or for him go,
      I am, tyl God me bettre mynde sende,
      At _Dulcarnon, right at my wyttes end_.

      "(Quod Pandarus). Ye nece! Wol ye here?
      _Dulcarnon_ is called flemyng of wretches.
      It semeth harde, for wretches wol nought lere
      For very slouthe, or other wylful tetches:
      This is said by hem, that be not worthe two fetches.
      But ye ben wyse," &c.

Now Speght, in his Glossary to the edition of 1602, says:

  "Dulcarnon is a proposition in Euclide, lib. i. theorem 33.
  propos. 47., which was found out by Pythagoras after an whole
  yeeres study, and much beating of his brayne. In thankfulnes
  whereof he sacrificed an oxe to the gods; which sacrifice he
  called _Dulcarnon_. Alexander Neckham, an ancient writer, in his
  booke _De Naturis rerum_, compoundeth this word of _Dulia_ and
  _Caro_, and will have Dulcarnon to be _quasi sacrificium carnis_.
  Chaucer aptly applieth it to Creseide in this place: showing that
  she was as much amazed how to answer Troilus, as Pythagoras was
  wearied to bring his desire to effect."

Master Speght is somewhat in error in his solution: let us hear another
expositor. I have mentioned in your pages the existence of a translation
into rhymed Latin verse of the whole of Chaucer's _Troilus_, with a
copious commentary by Sir Francis Kynaston; and I may now add, for Mr.
Lang's satisfaction, that it is _penes me_. The following note there
occurs on this word:

  "_Dulcarnon_, &c. By this exposition, which Pandarus makes of the
  word _Dulcarnon_, it is plaine that Chaucer sets it downe here as
  a worde in use in his time, and such a one as the logicians do
  call (being a word of no significant sense) _vox significans ad
  placitum_, as in English _twittle twattle_, _fiddle faddle_,
  quibling and conundrums, and the like. So _Dulcarnon_ in those
  times was a word of the same signification as we at this day do
  use _nonplus_; as we say by a scholler that is apposed and cannot
  answer any further, that he is _put to a nonplus_, a phrase
  derived from Hercules' motto written upon the two great Gaditane
  pillars set on either side the Straights of Gibraltar: which
  Hercules constituted as the end of the world with these words, NON
  PLUS ULTRA: meaning that no man ever did or could go further than
  those pillars. For Neckham's far-fetch'd criticisme in deriving
  the etymologie of the word Dulcarnon from the Greeke word
  _Doulia_, and the Latine word _Carnium_, that is, the service of
  flesh, which Euclide sacrificed for joy of the invention of a
  probleme which he demonstrated, [and] on which he had long
  studied, [it] is in my minde quite from the purpose."

The usual explanation, with a reference to Chaucer, will be found in
Blount's _Glossographia_, and in Philips's _World of Words_, as well as
in the folio edition of Bailey's _Dictionary_, where it is well defined
"_to be nonplussed, to be at one's wit's end_."

Mr. Inglis's note to his translation of Richard de Bury's
_Philobiblion_, which is taken from Billingsley, points out the
connexion between the words _Ellefuga_ and _Dulcarnon_, which, as he
says, "have been a _pons asinorum_ to some good Grecians." The reason
will appear to have been that the words were derived from the _Arabic_,
and not from the _Greek_, according to Dr. Adam Littleton:

  "_Dulcarnon_, i.e. bicorne, cornutum, Ã  figura sic dicta. A hard
  proposition in Euclid, l. 1. prop. 47. So called in _Arabic_, and
  used by old English writers for _any hard question or point_.
  DILEMMA, PROBLEMA."

So that to be at Dulcarnon may be said to be _on the horns of a
dilemma_.

    S. W. SINGER.

I cannot see the great difficulty which Mr. Halliwell and your
correspondents perceive in the use of this word. Of course they are
aware, that Iscander Dulcarnein (Alexander Bicornis) is Alexander the
Great, the same name being also fabulously ascribed to a far more
ancient and imaginary king; and that the Ã¦ra of Dulcarnein (or
Macedonian Ã¦ra) is well known in Eastern chronology. There is therefore
no doubt about the word, only about its application. Why did the name of
this king stand for our Coventry or Jericho, a place to which the people
are flemed or banished?

Because Dulcarnein built the famous iron walls of Jajuge and Majuge,
within which Gog and Magog are confined until the latter days of the
world; when God shall reduce the wall to dust, and set free the captive
nations (_Koran_, cap. xviii.). Sending to Dulcarnein is merely an
ellipsis of the person for his place, _i.e._ for the rampart of
Dulcarnein. Certainly no men can be more effectually flemed than Gog and
Magog were.

But as to the point of being "at one's wits end," no one can be so
little conversant with human affairs as the inmates of the iron wall.
Knowledge depends much on place. So sailors say, "he has been _before_."

I have only an uncommented text of Chaucer. But I cannot understand his
editors allowing this word to "set them at defiance."

    A. N.


ST. GEORGE HERALDICAL MSS.

(Vol. v., pp. 59. 135.)

It seems to be of so much importance to ascertain the safety of these
manuscripts, that M--N. trusts he need not apologise for stating in "N.
& Q." the result thus far of his inquiry after their present ownership.
In consequence of the recommendation of E. A. G. (Vol. v., p. 135.), Sir
Edward Tierney has been applied to, but he unfortunately knows nothing
of their fate, suggesting, however, a reference to Mr. Woodgate, who was
concerned as solicitor at the time of the sale. Mr. Woodgate has been
written to, and states that the manuscripts were sold with the other
effects of Lord Egmont, but he knows not to whom; he mentions Mr.
Braithwaite as the auctioneer. To apply to Mr. Braithwaite would be only
carrying the inquiry round in a circle, for twenty years ago, as was
stated at page 59, no satisfactory information could be gained there.
All, therefore, that remains is to place on record in this useful
journal the fact of the disappearance of these manuscripts, in the hopes
that some one of its numerous readers may be able now or hereafter to
give some account of their existence. When it is recollected that the
only copies of many of the latest visitations were among these
collections, and that the latter portion of the seventeenth century, to
which these visitations refer, is exactly that period in which
genealogists, from many causes, find the connexion of pedigrees the most
difficult, the discovery of their fate is not without its interest.

    M--N.

Noble's account of the sale of these MSS., after the death of Garter in
1715, is as follows:

  "Mr. Bridges of Herefordshire, his executor, obtaining possession
  of the heraldic books which Garter had in his house, never
  returned them to the College; they were very numerous and
  valuable, being some of the original visitations, taken by or
  under the authority of the St. Georges. With these also were many
  of Camden's books. These original documents were scandalously sold
  by Messrs. Wynne and Gregory [sons-in-law of Sir Henry St. George]
  to Thomas Percival, Earl of Egmont, a great lover of genealogical
  studies, who gave for them 500_l._: they are now possessed by that
  nobleman's grandson, John-James, the present Earl of
  Egmont."--_Hist. Coll. Arms_, p. 353. 4to. 1804.

This statement has led to the inference, that the _whole_ of St.
George's MSS. were disposed of to Lord Egmont; but the fact is
otherwise, for by far the most valuable portion of them was subsequently
in the hands of Thomas Osborne, the well-known bookseller of Gray's Inn;
who printed a list of them, with an index of the pedigrees, in his
catalogue entitled:

  "A Catalogue of several valuable Libraries of Books and MSS. &c.
  To which is prefixed a Genealogical Library in above Two hundred
  Manuscript Volumes in folio, &c. Collected and augmented by the
  late Sir Henry St. George, Knt., Garter King of Arms, and his
  ancestors, in the office of Arms, for above these hundred years
  past. To begin to be sold, 27 November, 1738."

These MSS. are 216 in number, and many of them are at present in the
British Museum, in the Lansdowne Collection of MSS. Osborne reprinted
this list in his next catalogue for February 1738/9, entitled:

  "An Extensive and Curious Catalogue of valuable Books and MSS. in
  all Languages, &c., including a very large Collection of Curious
  Genealogical Tracts," &c.

After the MSS., which occupy pp. 68-92., is an "Appendix," consisting of
thirty-three pedigree rolls, chiefly on vellum, which also belonged to
St. George.

To conclude with a _Query_, may I ask, if any complete list of Osborne's
Catalogues can be obtained _previous_ to 1756, when the list in
Nichols's _Literary Anecdotes_, vol. iii., begins?

      Î¼.


STERNE IN PARIS.

(Vol. v., p. 105.)

I inclose a copy of an autograph letter of Sterne's written when at
Paris. It is very interesting, and is not contained among his published
letters. Some few words are illegible, and several of the proper names
may be inaccurately copied.

      "Paris, March 15, 1762.

"My Dear,--Having an opportunity of writing by a physician, who is
posting off for London to-day, I would not omit doing it, though you
will possibly receive a letter (which is gone from hence last post) at
the very same time. I send to Mr. Foley's every mail-day, to inquire for
a letter from you; and if I do not get one in a post or two, I shall be
greatly surprised and disappointed. A terrible fire happened here last
night, the whole fair of St. Germain's burned to the ground in a few
hours; and hundreds of unhappy people are now going crying along the
streets, ruined totally by it. This fair of St. Germain's is built upon
a spot of ground covered and tiled, as large as the Minster Yard,
entirely of wood, divided into shops, and formed into little streets,
like a town in miniature. All the artizans in the kingdom come with
their wares--jewellers, silversmiths,--and have free leave from all
parts of the world to profit by general licence from the Carnival to
Easter. They compute the loss at six millions of livres, which these
poor creatures have sustained, not one of which have saved a single
shilling, and many fled out in their shirts, and have not only lost
their goods and merchandize, but all the money they have been taking
these six weeks. _Oh! ces moments de malheur sont terribles_, said my
barber to me, as he was shaving me this morning; and the good-natured
fellow uttered it with so moving an accent, that I could have found in
my heart to have cried over the perishable and uncertain tenure of every
good in this life.

"I have been three mornings together to hear a celebrated pulpit orator
near me, one PÃ¨re Clement, who delights me much; the parish pays him 600
livres for a dozen sermons this Lent; he is K. Stanislas's
preacher--most excellent indeed! his matter solid, and to the purpose;
his manner, more than theatrical, and greater, both in his action and
delivery, than Madame Clairon, who, you must know, is the Garrick of the
stage here; he has infinite variety, and keeps up the attention by it
wonderfully; his pulpit, oblong, with three seats in it, into which he
occasionally casts himself; goes on, then rises, by a gradation of four
steps, each of which he profits by, as his discourse inclines him: in
short, 'tis a stage, and the variety of his tones would make you imagine
there were no less than five or six actors on it together.

"I was last night at Baron de Bagg's concert; it was very fine, both
music and company; and to-night I go to the Prince of Conti's. There is
a Monsieur PopigniÃ¨re, who lives here like sovereign prince; keeps a
company of musicians always in his house, and a full set of players; and
gives concerts and plays alternately to the grandees of this metropolis;
he is the richest of all the farmer...; he did me the honour last night
to send me an invitation to his house, while I stayed here--that is, to
his music and table.

"I suppose you had terrible snows in Yorkshire, from the accounts I read
in the London papers. There has been no snow here, but the weather has
been sharp; and was I to be all the day in my room, I could not keep
myself warm for a shilling a day. This is an expensive article to great
houses here--'tis most pleasant and most healthy firing; I shall never
bear coals I fear again; and if I can get wood at Coswold, I will always
have a little. I hope Lydia is better, and not worse, and that I shall
hear the same account of you. I hope my Lydia goes on with her French; I
speak it fast and fluent, but incorrect both in accent and phrase; but
the French tell me I speak it most surprisingly well for the time. In
six weeks I shall get over all difficulties, having got over one of the
worst, which is to understand whatever is said by others, which I own I
found much trouble in at first.

"My love to my Lyd----. I have got a colour into my face now, though I
came with no more than there is in a dishclout.

      "I am your affectionate
      "L. STERNE.

      "For Mrs. Sterne at York."

    H. A. B.

A letter from Sterne, dated Paris, May 19, 1764, giving an account of
his mode of life there, and other notices of him in France, are to be
found in a small tract, _Seven Letters written by Sterne and his
Friends, hitherto unpublished_, edited by William Durrant Cooper, 1844.

    M. T. R.

Though not cotemporary, there are some lively notices of Sterne's
journey to France in the _London Magazine_ for 1825, pp. 38. 387.

    COWGILL.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Collar of Esses._--As an original subscriber, and the _first_ Querist
who opened the _vexata questio_ of Collar of Esses, I shall perhaps be
doing you a kind service, Mr. Editor, if I may be allowed to step
forward once more as _moderator_ between the disputants, as I did (Vol.
ii., p. 394.) between ARMIGER and a much respected correspondent.

There may be some excuse for H. B. as he confesses (Vol. v., p. 182.)
himself to be _freshman_ in the pages of "N. & Q.;" and therefore he is
a stranger to the tone of courtesy and good humour which are so
essential to the prosperity, maintenance, and extension of your very
useful periodical. A little more experience in his readings, and less of
self-opiniatedness, would have spared him the severe but merited remarks
of MR. L. EVANS (Vol. v., p. 207.).

As of old all writers were wont to consider their readers _most
courteous_, so let those who write for your pages reverse this rule--and
then there will be nothing contrary to such a tone, to the injury of "N.
& Q."

    S. S.

_Quid est Episcopus_ (Vol. v., p. 177.).--This passage does not, as X.
G. X. thinks, come from IrenÃ¦us, but from St. Austin. I find the
reference to it in Bingham's _Antiquities_ (vol. i. p. 72. ed. 1843),
where the whole passage is thus quoted at the foot of the page:

  "Quid est episcopus, nisi primus presbyter, id est, summus
  sacerdos?"--_Aug. QuÃ¦st. Vet. et N. Test._ c. ci.

    F. A.

_Paper-making in England_ (Vol. v., p. 83.).--I do not pretend to know
anything of the history of paper-making; but it may be well to send you
a passage from Fuller's _Worthies_ (Vol. i. p. 224., ed. Nuttall), which
lately fell in my way:

  "Paper is entered as a manufacture of this county
  [Cambridgeshire], because there are mills nigh Sturbridge fair,
  where paper was made in the memory of our fathers. Pity the making
  thereof is disused: considering the vast sums yearly expended in
  our land for paper out of Italy, France, and Germany, which might
  be lessened, _were it made in our nation_."

    J. C. R.

"_Mother Damnable_" (Vol. v., p. 151.).--The real name of this shrew
does not appear to have reached posterity, but she gave rise to the sign
of Mother Red-cap on the Hampstead Road, A.D. 1676, and was probably the
person represented _on_ that sign; to her portrait, which may be found
in a book published by "Arnett, Westminster, 1819," entitled _Portraits
and Lives of Remarkable and Eccentric Characters_, are annexed the
following lines:

      "You've often seen (from Oxford tipling house)
      Th' effigies of Shipton fac'd Mother Louse,
      Whose pretty pranks (tho' some they might excel)
      With this old trot's ne'er gallop'd parallel--
      'Tis Mother Damnable! that monstrous thing,
      Unmatch'd by Macbeth's wayward women's ring,
      For cursing, scolding, fuming, flinging fire
      I' th' face of madam, lord, knight, gent, cit, squire;
      Who (when but ruffled into the least pet)
      With cellar door-key into pocket get--
      Then no more ale; and now the fray begins!
      'Ware heads, wigs, hoods, scarfs, shoulders, sides, and shins!
      While these dry'd bones, in a Westphalian bag,
      (Through the wrinkled weasan of her shapeless crag)
      Send forth such dismal shrieks and uncouth noise,
      As fills the town with din, the streets with boys;
      Which makes some think, this fierce she-dragon fell
      Can scarce be match'd by any this side hell.
      So fam'd both far and near, is the renown
      Of Mother Damnable of Kentish Town.
      Wherefore this symbol of the cat's we'll give her,
      Because, so curst, a dog, would not dwell with her."

    JAMES CORNISH.

_Miniature of Cromwell_ (Vol. v., p. 189.).--At the last meeting of the
Society of Scottish Antiquaries, a curious jewel, belonging to the Earl
of Leven, and entailed in his lordship's family, was exhibited by the
Hon. Leslie Melville. It is believed to have been transmitted by the
Speaker of the House of Commons to the Earl of Leven on the occasion of
the surrender of Charles I., when the earl was in command of the army at
Newark. The jewel encloses a beautiful little miniature of Oliver
Cromwell.

    E. N.

_Etymology of Church_ (Vol. v., p. 79.).--Gieseler, in his _Lehrbuch der
Kirchengeschichte_, vol. i., p. 1. ed. 4., says that the word _kirche_
(and consequently _church_) is most probably derived from Ïá½¸
ÎºÏÏÎ¹Î±Îºá½¹Î½. In support of this opinion, he quotes Walafrid Strabo, who
wrote about A.D. 840:

  "Si autem quÃ¦ritur qua occasione ad vos vestigia hÃ¦c GrÃ¦citatis
  advenerint, dicendum--prÃ¦cipue a Gothis, cum eo tempore quo ad
  fidem Christianam, licet non recto itinere [_i.e._ by means of
  Arianism], perducti sunt, in GrÃ¦corum provinciis commorantes,
  nostrum, _i.e._ theotiscum, sermonem habuerint."

He adds that Ulphilas is evidence for the general adoption of Greek
ecclesiastical terms by the Goths; and he confirms the idea of a Greek
derivation by the remark that derivatives of ÎºÏÏÎ¹Î±Îºá½¹Î½ occur,
not only in the Teutonic languages, but in those of the Sclavonic
nations, whose conversion proceeded from Greece. Thus, the Bohemian
word is _cyrkew_, the Russian _zerkow_, the Polish _cerkiew_. The use of
derivatives of _ecclesia_ (which I would remind MR. STEPHENS is also
originally Greek) in the Roman languages, no doubt arises from the
circumstance that that word had been adopted into Latin, whereas the
other had not.

    J. C. R.

_The KÃ¶nigsmarks_ (Vol. v., pp. 78. 115. 183.).--It is certain from the
_State Trials_, ix. 31., that Count Charles John KÃ¶nigsmark, the
murderer of Mr. Thynn, was the elder of the two brothers; for it
appeared on the trial that the younger, Philip Christopher (a dozen
years later the gallant of the young Princess of Hanover), was at that
time a youth still under the care of a travelling tutor, who was
examined on the trial. This is stated in the _Quarterly Review_, art.
"Lexington Papers," to which inquirers had been already referred (Vol.
v., p. 115.). I am a little at a loss to account for J. R. J.'s
distribution of his epithets; he calls the case of the elder brother
"_mysterious_," and that of the second "_well-known_," when in truth the
former case is, and has been _well-known_ these hundred and fifty years.
Whereas the second case was so long a mystery that it was nowhere told
but in a corner of Horace Walpole's _Reminiscences_, and he was mistaken
as to the identity of the victim,--a mistake but recently cleared up. I
believe, too, that until the discovery of the Lexington Papers, no one
altogether believed the story; and the minuter details of the case, such
as by whose order, and how, and when and where the deed was done, and
how and where the body was disposed of, are still so far mysterious that
Walpole's _Reminiscences_ and the Princess's own notes differ
essentially on all those points.

    C.

_L'Homme de 1400 Ans_ (Vol. v., p 175.).--I have not immediate means of
access to the French work referred to in No. 121. of "N. & Q.," and
therefore do not know how far the personage there alluded to is
described as "imaginary;" but it appears to me that Cagliostro may have
intended reference to his great friend and predecessor in Rosicrucian
philosophy, the Count de St. Germain. This arch-impostor, who attained
no small celebrity at the court of Louis XV., pretended to be possessed
of the elixir of life, by means of which he had prolonged his existence
from a period which he varied according to the supposed credulity of his
audience; at one time carrying back the date of his birth to the
commencement of the Christian Era, at others being content to assume an
antiquity of a few centuries, being assisted in his imposture by a most
accurate memory of the history of the times, the events of which he
related, and also by an able accomplice who attended him as a servant.
On one occasion, when describing at a dinner table a circumstance which
had occurred at the court of "his friend Richard I. of England," he
appealed to his attendant valet for the confirmation of his story, who,
with the greatest coolness replied: "You forget, Sir, I have only been
500 years in your service." "True," said his master, "it _was_ a little
before your time." The origin of this able charlatan, of whom many other
amusing stories are related, is not known. He was sometimes thought,
from the Jewish cast of his features, to be the "wandering Jew;" while
others reported that he was the son of an Arabian princess, and that his
father was a Salamander.

    E. H. Y.

_Close of the Wady Mokatteb Question_ (Vol. iv., p. 481.; Vol. v., pp.
31. 87. 159., &c.).--I should not have said another word on the above
question, had not DR. TODD seen fit to give a somewhat different turn to
the criticism on Num. xi. 26. As it is, I must beg space to say, that it
is the _learned_ whose attention I solicit to examine the value of our
respective criticisms, and not that of the _unlearned_, as DR. TODD
intimates. I do not think that there are many regular readers of the "N.
& Q." who can be classed amongst the _unlearned_. To the judgment of the
_learned_, therefore, I now resign this protracted disquisition.

    MOSES MARGOLIOUTH.

_Was Queen Elizabeth dark or fair?_ (Vol. v., p. 201.).--Paul Hentzner,
who was presented to Queen Elizabeth at the palace of Greenwich,
describes her majesty, who was then in her sixty-fifth year, as "very
majestic; her face oblong, _fair_, but wrinkled; her eyes small, yet
black and pleasant. She wore false hair, and that red." Delaroche,
however, in his well-known picture at the Luxembourg, has given her a
very swarthy complexion.

Query: What was the celebrated Lunebourg table, of some of the gold of
which, according to Hentzner, a small crown which she wore was reported
to be made?

    H. C.

  Workington.

_Meaning of Knarres_ (Vol. v., p. 200.).--A _knare_ is a _knot_ or lump,
"_knarry_, _stubby_, _knotty_" (Coles's _Dictionary_, 1717). It was, no
doubt, as J. BR. says, sometimes written _gnare_; and in that form is
the root of Shakspeare's "_gnarled_ (or knotty) oak." In Norfolk and
Suffolk, small plantations--_not_ "scrubby woods"--are called _carrs_,
as J. BR. states, but certainly not from _knare_, but, as I rather
think, from their square shape, _carrÃ©_. Those that I am acquainted with
in those counties are generally of that form, and look like plantations
made on purpose for game. When you hear a _carr_ mentioned in those
counties, you always think of a pheasants' preserve. I know not whether
the same word and meaning extend inland. Nor do I think that _knare_
has any affinity with _snare_.

    C.

In reply to your correspondent's Query, I beg to submit the following,
which may prove of utility in tracing out the meaning of the word,
viz.:--_Forby's Glossary_ by Turner, vol. i. p. 56., thus has it:

  "CAR, _s._ a wood or grove on a moist soil, generally of alders."

We have them in this country; also the term "osier-cars."

In Kersey's _English Dictionary_, 1708, we have thus:

  "GNAR or Gnur, a hard knot in wood."

In Bailey's _Dictionary_, 1753, we have it thus:

  "GNARR [Knorre, Teutonic], a hard knot in a tree.--_Chaucer._"

May it not thus mean a knot or clump of trees?

It is also allied to _quarry_, from the French _carrÃ©_, which signifies
a bed, not only for digging stones for building purposes, but also as
they are sometimes called, _osier-beds_, _alder-beds_.

The towns "Narborough" and "Narford" in Norfolk are so called from their
being situated on the river "Nar;" the one a city or town on the river;
and the other being, by means of a ford, originally over it. Both were
originally written _Nere_ as the prefix.

    J. N. C.

_Cheap Maps_ (Vol. v., p. 174.).--PATERFAMILIÃ is informed that a good
and not expensive map of Borneo has been recently published by Augustus
Petermann; and a section of the Isthmus of Panama, showing the railway
from Chargres to Panama, may be had of the Admiralty agent for a few
pence.

    NORTHMAN.

_English Free Towns_ (Vol. v., pp. 150. 206.).--A short ride from Oxford
will take your correspondent J. H. PARKER to one or two market towns in
Berks, answering to the description given of the French Villes
Anglaises. Wokingham will afford an illustration somewhat resembling
Winchelsea; the town is of triangular form, the streets meeting in a
central area, which contains a quaint old market-house: it is within the
prescribed limits of Windsor Forest, and the Forest Courts were formerly
held there--the charter of incorporation has existed from time
immemorial.

    KT.

_Sir Alexander Cumming and the Cherokees._--There is a Query by S. S.
(Vol. iii., p. 39.) about Sir Alexander Cumming and the Cherokees, which
I do not think has yet had any reply. Vol. iii., p. 152., a replyist
refers to a work in which is an autobiography of the baronet. I have not
had an opportunity to refer to _that_, but I suspect it would not meet
the question, as Sir Alexander Cumming of Coulter, who was created a
Nova Scotia baronet 1695, and Alexander Cumming, the King of the
Cherokees, were diverse persons. The last died in 1775, and according to
Lysons was buried at East Barnet. At vol. iv. p. 20., under Barnet,
Lysons gives the following account bearing on the Cherokees:

  "In 1729 he (Cumming) was induced, by a dream of Lady Cumming's,
  to undertake a voyage to America, for the purpose of visiting the
  Cherokee nations. He left England on the 13th of September, and
  arrived at Charlestown on the 5th of December. On the 11th of
  March following he set out for the Indians' country; on the 3rd of
  April, 1730, he was crowned commander and chief ruler of the
  Cherokee nations, in a general meeting of chiefs at Nequisee among
  the mountains; he returned to Charlestown the 13th of April with
  six Indian chiefs, and on the 5th of June arrived at Dover; on the
  18th he presented the chiefs to George II. at Windsor, where he
  laid his crown at his Majesty's feet; the chiefs also did homage,
  laying four scalps at the king's feet, to show that they were an
  overmatch for their enemies, and five eagles' tails as emblems of
  victory. These circumstances are confirmed by the newspapers of
  that time, which are full of the proceedings of the Cherokees
  whilst in England, and speak of them as brought over by Sir
  Alexander Cumming. Their portraits were engraved on a single
  sheet. In 1766 Archbishop Secker appointed him one of the
  pensioners in the Charter-House, where he died at a very advanced
  age."

His son, who succeeded him in the title, became deranged in his
intellects, and died about three years ago, in a state of indigence, in
the neighbourhood of Red Lion Street, Whitechapel. He had been a captain
in the army: the title became extinct at his death.

    C. G.

_Junius_ (Vol. iii., p. 411.; Vol. v., p. 159.).--As in No. 120. J. R.
assumes the acrimonious bearing of M. J. in No. 82., I am induced to
refer to the stale, flat, and unprofitable question of the authenticity
of the Letters of Junius. If those gentlemen will refer to No. 82., p.
412., fifth line from the bottom, and read "_who once_" for "_and
once_," they will find any acrimony unnecessary; and that the use of the
word "_and_" was an accidental error. This useless riddle has occupied
too much of the time of able and of idle men, on what is, moreover, a
worthless subject. Dr. Johnson, in his paper on the "Falkland Islands,"
has given a severe but just criticism on Junius, and truly says, that
most readers mistake the "venom of the shaft for the vigour of the bow."
Junius has laid down no great principle, illustrated no political truth,
nor given any clear and irrefutable proof of contemporaneous history. To
attribute reprehensible motives always shows lowness and vulgarity of
mind. Junius gives one the idea of a democratic ruff mounted on stilts
going, from natural predilection, through the mud and dirt, and
splashing it wantonly, so as to bespatter and annoy a few, and to excite
the attention and surprise of many; but never to produce a conviction of
being just and true on any one.--_Requiescat in pace._

    ÃGROTUS.

_Hell-Rake_ (Vol. v., p. 162.).--The explanation given by J. SANSOM of
the Devonian use of the term _helling_ or _heleing_, signifying the roof
or covering of a church, corresponds to the Midland meaning of the word
_hilling_, _s._ bed-clothes or coverlet: "She has got no _hilling_ at
all." Ger. _HÃ¼llen_, to wrap one's self up; Saxon, _hilan_. In
Warwickshire used for the covers of a book: "It is the _hilling_ which
makes it so expensive." _Hilled_, p. _hilled up_, _i.e._ covered with
bed-clothes. Leicestershire is particularly rich in quaint phrases and
proverbs.

In Leicestershire it is common for the wives of farmers to style their
husbands "the Master," and husbands to call their wives "Mamy;" and a
labourer will often distinguish his wife by the title of "the O'man."
There are people now living who remember the time when _Goody_ and
_Dame_, "Gaffer" and "Gammer," were in vogue among the peasantry.

    KT.

_Ambassadors addressed as Peers_ (Vol. v., p. 213.).--I must leave you
to judge whether a reference to Howell's _Familiar Letters_ is likely to
be new to your correspondent MR. J. G. NICHOLS, or of any service to him
in his inquiry on this subject. His note reminded me that Howell had
respectfully used the words "My Lord," and "Your Lordship," apparently
in the modern sense of "Your Excellency," in his letters to the Right
Hon. Sir Peter Wichts, and to the Right Hon. Sir Sackvill Crow,
ambassadors at Constantinople. See Howell's _Familiar Letters_, Part I.
Letters 115. 130.; Part II. Letters 18. 27.

    C. FORBES.

  Temple.

_Red Book of the Irish Exchequer_ (Vol. iii., p. 6.).--J. F. F. may find
some information in Mr. Mason's description of the sketch in the 13th
vol. of the _Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy_.

    R. H.

_Yankee, Derivation of_ (Vol. iii., pp. 260. 437. 461.).--I send you a
Note on the etymology of this word, which I do not see noticed by any of
your correspondents:

  "When the New England Colonies were first settled, the inhabitants
  were obliged to fight their way against many nations of Indians.
  They found but little difficulty in subduing them all except one
  tribe, who were known by the name of Yankoos, which signifies
  invincible. After the waste of much blood and treasure, the
  Yankoos were at last subdued by the New Englandmen. The remains of
  this nation (agreeable to the Indian custom) transferred their
  name to their conquerors. For a while they were called Yankoos;
  but from a corruption, common to names in all languages, they got
  through time the name of Yankee."--_New York Gazetteer_, June 1,
  1775.

    R. H.

_Indian Jugglers; Ballad of Ashwell Thorp_ (Vol. iv., p. 472.).--The
correspondent who inquires about the Indian jugglers' trick of "growing
a mango," is referred to Blomfield's _History of Norfork_, vol. v. p.
155. (8vo edition), where he will find a curious song, called the
"Ballad of Ashwell Thorp," (said to be made in Sir Thomas Knevet's time,
who was Sheriff of Norfolk in 1579, and died about 1616), showing that a
similar trick was known in England at that time. An account is here
given of an acorn being sown in the middle of a hall, growing up in a
few minutes to a prodigious tree, bearing acorns, which ripened and
fell; and how, after the tree had been with much difficulty cut down by
two woodcutters, the trunk and fragments were finally carried away by
two goslings. The feat is said to have been performed by a Londoner. The
ballad-monger has perhaps improved a little upon the simple facts of the
case. He concludes by saying:

      "This story is very true
      Which I have told to you,
        'Tis a wonder you didn't heare it.
      I'll lay a pint of wine,
      If Parker and old Hinde
        Were alive, that they would swear it."

    C. W. G.

_Meaning of Crabis_ (Vol. v., p. 165.).--In quoting the note to Lord
Lindsay's _Christian Art_, extracted from MS. _Collectanea_ of Sir David
Lindsay of the Mount, and illustrating a story of the Pelican, your
correspondent F. W. I. wishes for a translation of the word _crabis_,
which Sir David makes use of in describing the undutiful behaviour of
the young pelicans towards their paternal parent.

The old Scotch verb, _crab_, signified to tease, vex, annoy. As an
active verb it is now obsolete, but it is still in use, at least its
participles are in a passive sense. I have frequently heard _crabbing_
used to describe the state of mind of one out of humour or sulking.
_Crabbed_ has long been an English word, and as such has its place in
Johnson's _Dictionary_. It is not in such common use to the south as it
is to the north of the Tweed; but from the Land's End to
John-o'-Groat's, it is used to designate a chronic form of the same
failing, which, in its temporary form, is described above as "crabbing."
It is, moreover, applied to man's works as well as to his temper. A
_crabbed hand_ and a _crabbed style_ of writing are expressions of
every-day use in Scotland, and are eminently descriptive of the effect
of such writing upon the temper of the reader.

    W. A. C.

  Ormsary.

"_'Twas whisper'd in Heaven_" (Vol. v., p. 214.).--In Number 122. you
answer an inquiry of DIABOLUS GANDER, by stating your belief that the
enigma, "'Twas whisper'd in Heaven," &c., is by Lord Byron.

Although it was for some time attributed to this author, it became
subsequently well known to be the work of Miss Catherine Fanshawe, in
whose handwriting I have seen it, together with another unpublished
enigma of hers, in the album of a lady of my acquaintance.

    E. H. Y.

_"Troilus and Cressida," Act I. Sc. 3._ (Vol. v., pp. 178. 235.).--The
meaning which your correspondent wishes to give the word _dividable_
seems exactly the one wanted in this passage; but need we go so far from
its apparent derivation as to derive it from _divitias_, _dare_?--One of
the meanings of _divido_ is to distribute,--why then should not
_dividable_ mean _distributive_, distributing their riches, &c.?

    C. T. A.

  Lyndon Rectory, Uppingham.

_Stone-pillar Worship_ (Vol. v., p. 121.).--The article "Hermae," in
Smith's _Antiquities_, throws some light on this subject. The pillar set
up as a _witness_ (see Genesis there quoted, and the Classics
_passim_)[5] is of course closely connected with the idea of sanctity
attached to it. The Laplanders in selecting the _unhewn_ stone "in the
form in which it was shaped by the hand of the Creator Himself," seem,
to a certain extent, unwittingly to have obeyed a command of the
Creator: see Exodus, xx. 25.

  [Footnote 5: Is it not as the _witness_ and keeper of Holy Writ
  that St. Paul calls the church Î£Ïá½»Î»Î¿Ï ÎºÎ±á½¶ á¼Î´ÏÎ±á½·ÏÎ¼Î± Ïá¿Ï á¼Î»Î·Î¸Îµá½·Î±Ï?]

    A. A. D.

_John of Padua_ (Vol. v., pp. 79. 161.).--I am afraid we are not likely
to obtain much additional information about John of Padua. The only
account of him which I have ever met with is contained in the Earl of
Orford's _Works_ (vol. iii. p. 100. et seqq., edit. 1798). The warrant,
dated 1544, is there copied from Rymer's _Foedera_?; and from an
expression which it contains, the inference is drawn that "John of Padua
was not only an architect, but musician." I am not aware whether or no
there is any other authority for such inference, but, if there is not, I
submit that the evidence is far from conclusive. The words in the
warrant run thus: A fee of two shillings per diem is granted to John,
"in consideratione boni et fidelis servitii quod dilectus serviens
noster Johannes de Padua nobis in architecture, ac _aliis in re musica
inventis_ impendit ac impendere intendit."

Now, Sir, I submit that _res musica_, in this passage, is used in the
same sense as the Greek á¼¡ Î¼Î¿ÏÏÎ¹Îºá½´ for "the fine arts;" and
that the passage can have no reference to the art of the musician.

If John of Padua had been a musician, we should most probably meet with
his name in some of the accounts of plays and pageants during this
reign; and the silence of your correspondents seems to imply that no
information concerning him is to be obtained from those sources.

In the absence of further proof, then, I have no hesitation in proposing
to the critical readers of "N. & Q.," a resolution that, It is the
opinion of this council that there is no sufficient evidence that John
of Padua was a musician.

    ERICA.

_Modern Greek Names of Places_ (Vol. iv., p. 470.; Vol. v., pp. 14.
209.).--Your correspondent L. H. J. T. says, at p. 209.:--

  "That with the utmost deference to SIR J. EMERSON TENNENT, he must
  deny that Cos, Athens, or Constantinople have been called by the
  Greeks Stanco, Satines, or Stamboul. These corruptions have been
  made by Turks, Venetians, and Englishmen."

This mode of expression would imply that the opinion which he corrects
was held by me, whereas I have stated (Vol. v., p. 14.), even more
explicitly than he, that--

  "The barbarism in question is to be charged less upon the modern
  Greeks themselves, than upon the European nations, Sclavonians,
  Normans, and Venetians, and, later still, the Turks; who seized
  upon their country on the dismemberment of the Roman empire. The
  Greeks themselves, no doubt, continued to spell their proper names
  correctly; but their invaders, ignorant of their orthography, and
  even of their letters, were forced to write the names of places in
  characters of their own, guided solely by the sound."

    J. EMERSON TENNENT.

_Beocherie, alias Parva Hibernia_ (Vol. v., p. 201.).--_Beocera-ig_,
i.e. the bee-keeper's island, was one of the small islets adjacent to
the larger one, Avallon, whereon the Abbey of Glastonbury stood.
Glastonbury was early resorted to by Irish devotees; St. Patrick and St.
Bridget necessarily resided there. Concerning _Beocherie_ or _Bekery_,
we are told that there "olim sancta Brigida perhendinavit" (MS. Ashmol.
790, quoted in the _Monasticon_, vol. i. p. 22.). This accounts for the
name Parva Hibernia. _Beocera-gent_, in charter 652, is the name of some
landmark or boundary. There can be little doubt that we should read
_beocera-geat_, i.e. bee-keeper's gate, as suggested by Mr. Kemble in
the preface to the third vol. of _Codex Dipl._ p. xxvi. The duties and
rights of the _beocere_, _beo-ceorl_, or _bocherus_, are described in
the "Rectitudines singularum personarum," Thorpe's _Anc. Laws_, vol. i.
p. 434.

    C. W. G.

_Ruffles, when worn_ (Vol. v., pp. 12. 139.).--PlanchÃ©, in his _History
of British Costume_, says that during the reign of Henry VIII., "the
sleeves were _ruffed_, or _ruffled_ at the hand, as we perceive in the
portrait of Henry. _They were not added to the shirt till the next
century._"

    R. S. F.

  Perth.

_Long Meg of Westminster_ (Vol. ii., pp. 131. 172.; Vol. v., p.
133.).--As an instance of this title being applied (as Fuller has it)
"to persons very tall," I subjoin the following notice of a death,
which appeared in a newspaper of September, 1769:

  "At London, Peter Branan, aged 104. He was six feet six inches
  high, and was commonly called _Long Meg of Westminster_. He had
  been a soldier from eighteen years of age."

This notice is extracted in the _Edinburgh Antiquarian Magazine_, but
without mentioning the quarter from which it was taken.

    R. S. F.

  Perth.

_Family Likenesses_ (Vol. v., p. 7.).--To trace a family likeness for a
century is not at all uncommon. Any one who knows the face of the
present Duke of Manchester will see a strong likeness to his great
ancestor, through six generations, the Earl of Manchester of the
Commonwealth, as engraved in Lodge's _Portraits_. The following instance
is more remarkable. Elizabeth Hervey was Abbess of Elstow in 1501. From
her brother Thomas is descended, in a direct line, the present Marquis
of Bristol. If any one will lay the portrait of Lord Bristol, in Mr.
Gage Rokewode's _Thingoe Hundred_, by the side of the sepulchral brass
of the Abbess of Elstow, figured in Fisher's _Bedfordshire Antiquities_,
they cannot but be struck by the strong likeness between the two faces.

This is valuable evidence on the disputed point, whether portraits were
attempted in sepulchral brasses.

    VOKAROS.

"_A Roaring Meg_" (Vol. v., p. 105.).--In Ghent, in Flanders, there is
still to be seen a wrought-iron gun, a sister of Mons Meg, the famous
piece of artillery in Edinburgh Castle. She is named Dulle Griete, Mad
Margery, or Margaret, and may possible be the elder sister after whom
the rest of the family have been named.

    NORTHMAN.

_Lyte Family_ (Vol. v., p. 78).--A painted window representing the arms
of the Lytes, and the families with whom they intermarried for many
generations, is in the little church of Angersleigh, near Taunton.

    E. M.

_Nuremberg Token_ (Vol. v., p. 201).--The legend of H. C. K.'s medal
seems to me to be the following:--

      "Hans Kravwinkle in Nuremberg"

(the name of the issuer of the token).

      "Gottes Reich bleibt ewig [_und_ understood] ewig?"

      "The kingdom of God endures for ever and ever."

Possibly a tradesman's token.

    G. H. K.

_The Old Countess of Desmond_ (Vol. iv., _passim._).--Your several
correspondents whose able remarks have excited much interest with regard
to this very extraordinary individual, appear to have overlooked the
fact that a cabinet portrait by Rembrandt is to be seen in the
collection of the Marquess of Exeter at Burleigh; the age, costume, &c.,
corresponding exactly with the description given by Pennant, as quoted
by A. B. R.

    KT.

_Pimlico_ (Vol. i., pp. 388. 474; Vol. ii., p. 13.)--I find the two
following mentions of Pimlico as a public place of entertainment:

1. In _A Joviall Crew, or the Merry Beggars_, by R. Brome: first acted,
1641, at Drury Lane, edit. 1708:

      "To Pimblicoe we'll go,
        Where merry we shall be,
      With every man a can in 's hand
        And a wench upon his knee.
      And a begging," &c.

2. Massinger's _City Madam_:

                      "Or exchange wenches,
      Coming from eating pudding pies on a Sunday
      At Pimlico or Islington."

      G. H. K.

"_Wise above that which is written_" (Vol. v., p. 228.).--This phrase is
evidently a quotation of 1 Cor. iv. 6., though not according to the
authorised translation, the words in the original being Î¼á½´ á½Ïá½²Ï á½
Î³á½³Î³ÏÎ±ÏÏÎ±Î¹ ÏÏÎ¿Î½Îµá¿Î½. Here, however, the verb cannot mean "to be
wise," which is the meaning given to it in the phrase in question; for
the context requires it to be taken (as in our version) in the sense of
"elation of mind, to the despising of others."

The Query of R. C. C. reminds me of another phrase, which in a somewhat
similar way one hears continually quoted in sermons, &c., as a text:
viz. "that he that runs may read." I should like to know whether this
strange perversion of Hab. ii. 2., which seems to be the source whence
it is derived, can be accounted for in any way.

    F. A.

_Sir John Cheke_ (Vol. v., p. 200.).--C. B. T. will find an account of
Sir John Cheke in Harwood's _Alumni Etonenses_, under the head of
"Provosts of King's College." I send also from an old MS. the following
account; not being responsible for its accuracy, nor for the correctness
of the references:

  "Sir John Cheke put into the Provostship by Edward VI., April 1,
  1548, though not qualified, as not of the Society, nor in orders.
  See his _Life_ by Strype; Fuller, _Hist. Camb._, 119.; Burnet, ii.
  115., who says that in consequence of the controversy with
  Gardiner about the Gr. Pronuntiation he was either put from the
  chair, or willingly left it. This was not the case. He did not
  quit it till sent for by the King, as appears from the Life of his
  successor, Nic. Carr, p. 59.; see, too, Wood _Hist. and Antiq._,
  lib. i. p. 26. His mother stood godmother to the child of a poor
  woman in Cambridge Gaol on suspicion of murder. (See Latimer's
  _First Serm._ p. 125., edit. 1635; Burnet, ii. 213.; Wood, _Hist.
  and Antiq._, I. ii. 251.; Burnet, ii. 51., and _App._ 150.;
  Fuller, 29. 127.; and Fox, _Mart._; Burnet, ii. 155.; Burnet, ii.
  8. 203.; _Benefices conferred on Laymen, Walker's Attempt_, ii.
  68.; Wood, _Athen._, i. 111.) Burnet and Fuller's account of his
  retiring on the King's death do not agree. For his works see Bale,
  and his Life, by Dr. Gerard Langbaine, before a work of Cheke's,
  _The True Subject to the Rebel, or the Hurt of Sedition_: Oxon,
  1641, 4to. Haddon wrote his epitaph. See Ascham's _Letters_: Oxon,
  1703, p. 436., about his recantation. See Leland's _Cygnea
  Cantio_, 1558, p. 21.; and Preface to Hickes's _Thesaurus_, 1. 2."

    J. H. L.

_Richard Earl of Chepstow_ (Vol. v., p. 204.).--H. C. K. will find in
the _Conquest of Ireland_, by Giraldus Cambrensis, my authority for
styling Richard Strongbow Earl of Chepstow: _e.g._ Dermod MacMurrough
addresses a letter to him as follows: "Dermon MacMorogh, prince of
Leinster, to Richard earle of Chepstoue, and son of Gilbert the Earle,
greeting," &c. I quote from Hooker's translation, ed. 1587, p. 11.
Hooker, in a note, p. 4., says that Chepstow in times past was named
Strigulia, "whereof Richard Strangbow being earle, he took his name,
being called _Comes_ Strigulensis."

H. C. K.'s _second_ conjecture, as to the parentage given to Earl
Richard in the Ormonde charter, seems to be the correct one. I cannot
call to mind an instance of a second Christian name used at so early a
date.

The first coat given to the De Clares, in Berry's _Encycl._, viz. _ar.
on a chief az. three crosses pattÃ©e fichÃ©e of the field_, occurs on the
shield of the effigy in Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin, popularly said
to be that of Richard Earl of Pembroke. Query, does Berry's statement
rest on the authority of that tradition? if so, it has a very sandy
foundation. I have very little doubt that the bearing visible on the
shield, as represented on the earl's seal attached to the charter in
possession of the Earl of Ormonde, is intended to represent _three
chevrons_.

H. C. K. has my best thanks for his communication. I shall be still more
obliged by an extract from the pedigree in his possession.

    JAMES GRAVES.

  Kilkenny.

_Maps of Africa_ (Vol. v., p. 236.).--If your correspondent, who
inquires about maps of Africa, will consult the twenty-first map in
Spruner's _Atlas Antiquus_, published at Gotha in 1850, I think he will
find what he desires.

    E. C. H.

_Lady Diana Beauclerk._--I have to thank you for inserting my memorandum
respecting my miniature of Oliver Cromwell. I must further trespass on
your kindness to correct an error (and a very inexcusable one) in my
last statement, to which the kindness of a friend has called my
attention.

Lady Diana Beauclerk was not, as I stated, a daughter of the Duke of St.
Alban's, but of the Duke of Marlborough (Charles, second duke), and
married the Hon. Topham Beauclerk, who was the friend of Dr. Johnson,
and a well-known personage in his day.

The miniature therefore may have been "long" either in her own family,
or in that of her husband; but I presume she meant in her own. The
Churchills were as much connected with the "Stuarts" as afterwards with
their successors. I regret this inattention on my part.

    C. FOX.

"_Litera scripta manet_" (Vol. v., pp. 200. 237.).--I was intimate some
time since with a gentleman who had been a student in Maynooth College,
and who frequently used to quote the words "Litera scripta manet," with
the addition, "Verbum imbelle perit." This may give a clue to the source
of the phrase, which may be found probably in some ecclesiastical or
theological work of days gone by.

    A. L.

_"Qui vult plene," &c._ (Vol. v., p. 228.).--The first passage
respecting which W. DN. inquires ("Qui vult plenÃ¨," &c.) will be found
in the first chapter of the first book of Thomas Ã  Kempis, _De
Imitatione Christi_.

    L. M. M.

_Engraved Portraits_ (Vol. v., p. 176.).--In reply to S. S., the best
Catalogue of Engraved Portraits is one published by the late Mr. Edward
Evans, of Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, many years since;
and although the last number is 11,756, yet, as two and three portraits
are mentioned under the same figures, the total number noticed greatly
exceeds the above.

I believe a new edition _is_, or _shortly will be_, in the press.

    J. B. WHITBORNE.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, ETC.

So long as the people of this country are animated by that deep-rooted
love of true liberty and national independence, which have proved at so
many momentous periods of our history to be at once their ruling
principle and the country's safeguard, so long will the memory of
Gustavus Vasa, the patriotic king of Sweden, be to all Englishmen an
object of the deepest interest. The publication therefore of a _History
of Gustavus Vasa, with Extracts from his Correspondence_,--which,
although based upon the narrative of his startling adventures, his
gallant exploits, and the picture of his manly sincere character, and
his quaint but telling eloquence, given by Geijer in his _History of
Sweden_, has been carefully elaborated by references to original
authorities, and rendered more picturesque by the introduction of
copious extracts from his correspondence,--is good service rendered to
the cause of historic truth. The writer is obviously an earnest, able,
and painstaking man; and we think that his work will be received (as it
deserves) with such favour as to induce him to furnish us with other
illustrations of the history of the North.

If ever mortal man was a hero to his valet de chambre, such was the
"Great Cardinal" to his gentleman usher Master George Cavendish; and to
this fact and the reverent spirit which pervades his narration, may the
great popularity of _Cavendish's Life of Wolsey_ be in a great measure
ascribed. Few biographies have been perused with greater interest; few
have exercised the editorial skill of better scholars. Dr. Wordsworth,
Mr. Singer, and Mr. Hunter, have all displayed their learning and
ingenuity in its illustration; and we have been led into these remarks
by the receipt of a new and very handsomely printed edition, which has
just been published by Messrs. Rivington, and which has been edited by
Mr. Holmes of the British Museum. Mr. Holmes' name is a sufficient
guarantee for the manner in which that duty has been executed.

We learn from _The AthenÃ¦um_ of Saturday last that the Royal Society of
Antiquaries of Copenhagen, whose works illustrative of the early history
both of Greenland and America are known to many of our readers, are
about to publish a new edition of the _Orkneyinga Saga_, and sundry old
Northern fragments relative to Great Britain and Ireland; and in the
prosecution of this important and useful object they are desirous of
having the assistance and co-operation of the scholars and antiquaries
of this country. Antiquaries find favour in the North, for _The Times_
reports that the general yearly meeting of this Society was held on the
25th of February at the Christiansborg Palace, Copenhagen, his Majesty
the King of Denmark in the chair. The secretary, Professor C. Rafn, read
the report of transactions for the last year, and gave a _prÃ©cis_ of the
articles in the forthcoming archÃ¦ological works of the Society. The
printing and engravings of the second volume of the great work,
_AntiquitÃ©s Russes et Orientales_, are now nearly completed. The learned
professor exhibited four Icelandic planispheres and maps of the world,
from the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and made some observations on
the geographical and astronomical knowledge of the ancient
Scandinavians. The second volume of the Arna-Magnean Committee's edition
of _Snorro Sturleson's, or the Younger Edda_, was also nearly finished,
and preparations were being made for the publication of an _Icelandic
Diplomaticum_. His Majesty the King exhibited a remarkable collection of
antiquities of the bronze period discovered at Smorumorre, evidently
belonging to a workshop for the fabrication of such implements, and
clearly proving that bronze weapons, &c. had been made in Denmark. On
the characteristics of this collection His Majesty was graciously
pleased to deliver some very interesting observations. Professor
Wegener, Vice-President, read an able memoir on the history of the old
castles of Soborg and Adserbo, in the north of Iceland. The
ArchÃ¦ological Committee exhibited a collection of articles discovered at
Anhalt (in the Cattegat) which belonged to a workshop for the
manufacture of stone implements, on which Mr. Thomsen made some useful
remarks. The museum was in a flourishing state. There had been 148
donations received and 761 presentations of antiquities. The proceedings
were closed by the election of Victor Emanuel, King of Sardinia, and his
Royal Highness Prince Albert of Saxe Coburg Gotha, as fellows of the
Society.

BOOKS RECEIVED.--_The French in England, or Both Sides of the Question
on Both Sides of the Channel, being the Story of the Emperor Napoleon's
projected Invasion._ A brilliant, we might say eloquent, description of
the feeling which ran through the whole length and breadth of the land
when Napoleon's threats of invasion drew from the united nation, as with
the voice of one man, the declaration that "England never did, and never
shall lie at the proud foot of a conqueror!" In this picture of the past
we have a prophecy of the future, if the peace of Europe should be again
disturbed, and any attempt be made to renew the project of 1803. We do
not think this likely; but to secure Peace we must be prepared for War:
and he who, in the present aspect of affairs, would bid us disarm, must
be or fool, or traitor, or both.--_Memoirs of the late Thomas Holcroft,
written by himself, and continued to the time of his Death, from his
Diary, Notes, and Correspondence_, forms the new parts of _The
Traveller's Library_, and gives an interesting variety to this valuable
series.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

HALLERI (A.) ELEMENTA PHYSIOLOGIÃ CORPORIS HUMANI. 8 Vols. 4to. LausannÃ¦
and Lugd. Batav. 1757-66. Vol III.

RACCOLTA DI OPUSCULI SCIENTIFICI, &c., dal Padre Calogera. Venezia,
1728-57.

POWNALL'S TREATISE ON THE STUDY OF ANTIQUITIES. London, 1782. 8vo.

THE WHOLE DUTY OF A CHRISTIAN, by Way of Question and Answer: designed
for the Use of Charity Schools. By Robert Nelson, 1718.

QUARTERLY REVIEW. Nos. 153. to 166., both inclusive.

BELL'S FUGITIVE POETRY COLLECTION. Vols. X. and XVI. 12mo. 1790.

THE CRITIC, London Literary Journal. First 6 Nos. for 1851.

VOLTAIRE, [OE]UVRES COMPLETES DE. Aux Deux-Ponts. Chez Sanson et
Compagnie. Vols. I. & II. 1791-2.

SCOTT'S CONTINUATION OF MILNER'S CHURCH HISTORY. Part II. of Vol. II.
8vo.

SPECTATOR. No. 1223. Dec. 6, 1851.

EDWIN AND EMMA. Taylor, 1776.

ANNUAL REGISTER, from 1816 inclusive to the present time.

MEDICO-CHIRURGICAL TRANSACTIONS. From Part II. of Vol. XI. March, 1819;
and also from Vol. XXX.

THE CODE MATRIMONIAL. Paris, 1770.

PRO MATRIMONIO PRINCIPIS CUM DEFUNCTÃ UXORIS SORORE CONTRACTO RESPONSUM
JURIS, COLLEGII JURISCONSULTORUM IN ACADEMIÃ RINTELENSI. Published about
1655.

GREGORY'S (DR.) SECOND MEMORIAL TO THE MANAGERS OF THE ROYAL INFIRMARY,
EDINBURGH.

HERON'S (SIR ROBERT) NOTES. First Edition. Privately printed.

COBBETT'S STATE TRIALS. 8vo. Vol. VIII. 1810.

ISR. CLAUDERI DISPUTATIO DE SALE SUB PRÃSIDIO SAGITTARII. JenÃ¦, 1650.

CRESCENT AND THE CROSS. Vol. I. Third Edition.

MACKINNON'S HISTORY OF CIVILISATION. Vol. II. 1846.

LITE'S DODOENS' HERBAL. First Edition. (An imperfect copy to complete
another.)

TURNER'S A BOOKE OF THE NATURES OF THE BATHES IN ENGLAND. 1568. (An
imperfect copy to complete another.)

A MOST EXCELLENT AND PERFECTE CORNISH APOTHECARY. 1561. (An imperfect
copy to complete another.)

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

SUFFOLK BIBLICAL AND THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY, IPSWICH. _Will any of our
Ipswich correspondents favour us with a copy of the prospectus of this
institution, and the_ NAMES _of any of the clergy or gentry of Ipswich
who take any part in its management, or are trustees or directors of it;
as numerous applications for contributions of books to such library have
recently been received by theological writers from Mr. "John Glyde,
Jun.," a barber and hairdresser in Ipswich._

E. M. S., _who asks for information respecting_ Queen Brunhilda _or_
BrunÃ©haut, _is referred to our_ 4th Vol. pp. 86. 136. 193., _and our_
5th Vol. p. 206.

REPLIES RECEIVED.--_Black Book of Paisley--Traditions from Remote
Periods--Archaic and Provincial Words--Madrigal--Bull the Barrel--Friday
at Sea--The Verb "To commit"--Provincial Names--Arborei foetus--Engraved
Portraits--Young's "Narcissa"--Meaning of Knarres--Last of the
PalÃ¦ologi--Nuremberg Token--Martinique--Parish Registers--Collar of SS.,
&c.--Wise above that which is written--Dying Swan--Sir B.
Howard--Conquest of China--Litera Scripta manet--Gospel Oaks--Qui vult
plene, &c.--Old Scots March--Stone Pillar Worship--Plague Stones--Carmen
perpetuum--Reeve and Muggleton--Broad Arrow--Hyrne--Essay on Catholic
Communion--The Whole Duty of Man--Crooked Billet--Quotations
wanted--Pasquinades--Junius and the Quarterly--Bishop Kidder's
Autobiography--Which are the Shadows--Wolfe--Elegy on Coleman._

_Copies of our_ Prospectus, _according to the suggestion of_ T. E. H.,
_will be forwarded to any correspondent willing to assist us by
circulating them._

VOLUME THE FOURTH OF NOTES AND QUERIES, _with very copious_ INDEX, _is
now ready_, _price 9_s._ 6_d._ cloth boards._

"NOTES AND QUERIES" _is published at noon on Friday, so that the Country
Booksellers may receive Copies in that night's parcels, and deliver them
to their Subscribers on the Saturday._




WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND ANNUITY SOCIETY,

      3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.
      Founded A.D. 1842.

      _Directors._
      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

      _Trustees._
      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.
      _Consulting Counsel._--Sir Wm. P. Wood, M.P. Solicitor-General.
      _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.
      _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co. Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  Policies effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share in
  three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age    Â£  _s._  _d._
      17     1   14    4
      23     1   18    8
      27     2    4    5
      32     2   10    8
      37     2   18    6
      42     3    8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition, with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


THE TIMES NEWSPAPER.--Important Notice to the Public.--How frequently
does it happen to various members of society that they wish to purchase
a copy or copies of the previous dates of "The Times?" For historical,
legal, commercial, and social purposes, their possession may be
anxiously desired, and yet, how difficult it frequently is to procure
them; indeed, sometimes, from their scarcity, it is quite impossible. To
obviate this difficulty, a supply of the daily dates, of past and future
years, will be kept on sale at Mr. JAMES GILBERT's, 49. Paternoster Row,
London, at prices varying according to their relative scarcity. Town and
country orders will receive punctual attention. The public and the trade
may depend upon always getting at J. G.'s any dates or series of years
they may require. The various dates and years of "The Times" will also
be bought as above, to an unlimited extent of period and quantity.


NEW SCHOOL ATLASES, By ALEX. KEITH JOHNSTON, F.R.S.E., F.R.G.S., F.G.S.,
Author of the "Physical Atlas," &c.

  This Day is published,

  I.

  AN ATLAS OF GENERAL AND DESCRIPTIVE GEOGRAPHY, constructed with a
  special view to the purposes of sound instruction, and presenting
  the following new features:--Enlarged Size, and consequent
  Distinctness of Plan.--The most Recent Improvements in
  Geography.--A uniform Distinction in Colour between Land and
  Water.--Great Clearness, Uniformity, and Accuracy of Colouring.--A
  ready way of comparing Relative Areas by means of Scales.--The
  insertion of the Corresponding Latitudes of Countries, Towns,
  &c.--References to Colonial Possessions, &c., by Figures and
  Notes.--A carefully compiled and complete Index. Strongly
  half-bound, price 12_s._ 6_d._

  II.

  AN ATLAS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY, in which the subject is treated in
  a more simple and elementary manner than in the previous works of
  the same Author. Strongly half-bound, price 12_s._ 6_d._

  WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, Edinburgh and London; sold by all Booksellers.


The CALUMNIES of the ATHENÃUM JOURNAL EXPOSED, and their ATTACK on
PRIVATE CHARACTER OFFERED for PUBLIC WARNING.

  Next week, price 1_s._ post free.

  MR. WHITE'S LETTER to MR. MURRAY, on the Subject of the Byron,
  Shelley, and Keats MSS.; which Letter was suppressed by the
  AthenÃ¦um, but made the most dishonest and unmanly use of by them,
  in the concoction of their article of last Saturday on the above
  subject. This Letter will show Mr. Murray's purchase of the Byron
  MSS. at his own particular request upwards of three years since.
  Also of Mr. Moxon's knowledge of the Shelley and Keats MSS. at the
  same period, and of Mr. White's acting on Mr. Moxon's suggestion
  to offer the Letters at their actual cost to the Shelley family.

  London: WILLIAM WHITE, Pall Mall; and all Booksellers, Stationers,
  and Newsvenders.


NOTICE.--The BRITISH MUSEUM and WEEK BOOK OF FACTS, a New Periodical,
devoted to SCIENCE, ART, and GENERAL KNOWLEDGE, and a medium of
inter-communication for Naturalists, Geologists, Electricians,
Meteorologists, &c. &c., will be published on Saturday, the 13th
Instant, uniform with the "Illustrated News," eight pages, price 3_d._;
stamped 4_d._; yearly subscription, 12_s._ 6_d._; free by post, 17_s._
Advertisements and subscriptions received by all Newsvenders, and at the
OFFICE, THANET PLACE, TEMPLE BAR, where prospectuses may be obtained,
and Advertisements received.


TOMB OF THE TRADESCANTS.

  In Lambeth Churchyard is a Monument, once handsome and elaborately
  carved, which was erected in 1662 by the widow of JOHN TRADESCANT
  the younger, to the memory of her father-in-law, her husband, and
  her son, who were inhabitants of that parish.

  The Monument of the TRADESCANTS, which was repaired by public
  subscription in 1773, has now again fallen into decay. The
  inscription also on the stone that covers ASHMOLE's grave, who was
  himself buried in Lambeth Church, is now very nearly effaced. The
  restoration of that Church, now nearly finished, seems a fit
  occasion for repairing both these Monuments. It is therefore
  proposed to raise a fund for the perfect restoration of the Tomb
  of the TRADESCANTS, according to its original form, as represented
  in two drawings preserved in the Pepysian Library at Cambridge,
  and also for renewing ASHMOLE's epitaph. The cost will not be less
  than 100_l._, and assistance is earnestly requested from all who
  are anxious to preserve ancient monuments, especially those who
  are following the same pursuits as the TRADESCANTS, and who are
  daily deriving benefit and delight from the labours and
  discoveries of these first of English gardeners and naturalists.

  Contributions may be paid to,

      Sir William J. Hooker, K.H., &c. &c., Royal Gardens, Kew.
      Sir Charles G. Young, Garter.
      James Forbes Young, Esq., M.D., Lambeth.
      Philip Bury Duncan, Esq., Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.
      The Rev. C. B. Dalton, Rectory, Lambeth.

  Or to Messrs. Reeve, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden; Messrs. Van
  Voorst, Paternoster Row; Mr. Pamplin, Frith Street, Soho; or to
  the Old Bank, Oxford.


CHEAP TEA and CHEAP COFFEE.--Although we sell black tea at 3_s._ per
lb., and good black tea at 3_s._ 4_d._, strong coffee at 10_d._, and
fine coffee at a 1_s._ per lb., we still say to all who study economy,
that the best is the cheapest, particularly when the best can be
obtained from us at the following prices:--The best congou tea, 3_s._
8_d._ per lb.; the best souchong tea, 4_s._ 4_d._; the best gunpowder
tea, 5_s._ 8_d._ per lb.; the best old mocha coffee, 1_s._ 4_d._ per
lb.; the best West India coffee, 1_s._ 4_d._ per lb. The fine, true,
ripe, rich, rare souchong tea is now only 4_s._ per lb.; and the pure,
rich, rare gunpowder, 5_s._ per lb. Tea or coffee to the value of 40_s._
sent carriage free to any part of England, by PHILLIPS and Co., Tea
Merchants, 8. King William Street, City.


BOOK PLATES.--Heraldic Queries answered; Family Arms found, and every
information afforded. Drawing of Arms, 2_s._ 6_d._; Painting ditto,
5_s._; Book Plate Crest, 5_s._; Arms, &c. from 20_s._; Crest on Card
Plate, and One Hundred Cards, 8_s._; Queries answered for 1_s._ Saxon,
MediÃ¦val, and Modern Style Book Plates. The best Authorities and MS.
Books of thirty-five years' practice consulted. Heraldic Stamps for
Linen or Books, with reversed Cyphers and Crests. Apply, if by letter,
enclosing stamps or post office order, to JAMES FRISWELL (Son-in-law to
J. Rumley, publisher of "The Crest Book," "Heraldic Illustrations"),
Heraldic Engraver, 12. Brooke Street, Holborn.


NEW VOLUME BY THE REV. DR. MAITLAND.

  In small 8vo. price 5_s._

  EIGHT ESSAYS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS. By the Rev. S. R. MAITLAND,
  D.D., F.R.S and F.S.A.

  RIVINGTONS, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place;

  Of whom may be had, by the same Author,

  1. ERUVIN; or MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS on Subjects connected with the
  NATURE, HISTORY, and DESTINY OF MAN. Second Edition, 5_s._ 6_d._

  2. ESSAYS ON THE REFORMATION IN ENGLAND. 15_s._

  3. ESSAYS ON THE DARK AGES. Second Edition. 12_s._


QUARTERLY REVIEW. No. CLXXX.--NOTICE.--ADVERTISEMENTS and BILLS for the
above Periodical will be in time if forwarded to the Publisher before
the 27th inst.

  JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


Now Ready, with Maps, 8vo.

  HISTORY of GREECE. By GEORGE GROTE, Esq. Vols. IX. and X. From the
  Restoration of the Democracy at Athens, down to the Accession of
  Philip of Macedon, B.C. 403-359.

  JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


Now Ready, 8vo. 15_s._

  HISTORY of ENGLAND and FRANCE under the HOUSE of LANCASTER. With
  an Introductory View of the Early Reformation.

  JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


This Day, with Portrait, 8vo., 10_s._ 6_d._

  HISTORY of GUSTAVUS VASA, King of Sweden: With Extracts from his
  Correspondence.

  JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


Just Ready, price 4_s._,

  HOUSEHOLD CHEMISTRY; or, Rudiments of the Science applied to
  Every-day Life. By ALBERT J. BERNAYS, F.C.S.

  London: SAMPSON LOW, 169. Fleet Street.


Now Ready,

  THE CHURCH in the SCHOOLROOM. Sermons suitable for boys. By the
  Rev. LEOPOLD J. BERNAYS, A.M., late Fellow of St. John's College,
  Oxford. Fcap. 8vo. 5_s._

  London: SAMPSON LOW, 169. Fleet Street.


THE WIDE-WIDE WORLD; or, The Early Trials of Ellen Montgomery. Edited by
a CLERGYMAN of the CHURCH of ENGLAND. Two vols. fcap. 12_s._

  "The authoress writes with liveliness and elegance; her power of
  discriminating and presenting character is great; an air of
  cheerful piety pervades the whole work."--_Literary Gazette._

  London: SAMPSON LOW, 169. Fleet Street.


Just published, price 1_s._

  ON GEOLOGY in relation to the STUDIES of the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.
  By H. E. STRICKLAND, M.A., F.G.S., Deputy Reader in Geology,
  Oxford.

  J. VINCENT, Oxford; G. BELL, Fleet Street, London.


NOW READY,

  Price 2_s._ 6_d._--By Post, 3_s._

  THE IRISH QUARTERLY REVIEW, No. V. March, 1852.

  CONTENTS:

      I. HISTORY OF THE STREETS OF DUBLIN.
      II. DISRAELI'S BIOGRAPHY OF BENTINCK; FREE TRADE AND NO TRADE.
      III. MITFORD'S LITERARY RECOLLECTIONS.
      IV. MATURIN.
      V. SAM SLICK'S AMERICAN HUMOUR.
      VI. IRISH CHURCH HISTORY.

  Dublin: W. B. KELLY. London: SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, & Co. Edinburgh:
  OLIVER & BOYD.


The following BOOKS, forming a portion of the Library of a Clergyman
recently deceased, are on SALE, by T. B. SHARPE, 10. Ely Place, Holborn.
Delphin Classics, by Valpy, 160 vols. 8vo., purple calf gilt, very neat
set, 25_l._; Auctores Classici GrÃ¦ci Schaeffi, 67 Vols. 18mo., calf
neat, Lips., 1820, 4_l._ 4_s._, Heywoode's Works, black letter, scarce,
4to., 1562, 3_l._ 3_s._; Vision of Pierce Plowman, black letter,
original edition, 4to., half-bound, 1550, 3_l._ 3_s._; Camden Society
Publications, from its commencement, 52 vols. 4to. cloth, with MS.
Notes, 1838-51, 6_l._ 16_s._ 6_d._; Shakspeare Society Publications, 3
vols. 8vo. cloth, 1840, &c., 4_l._ 10_s._; Ancient and Modern British
Drama, 8 vols. royal 8vo., half calf gilt, Miller, 1810-11, 3_l._ 13_s._
6_d._; Jewel's Works, black letter, folio, calf neat, 2_l._ 2_s._; Percy
Society Publications, 57 numbers (35 half bound, 22 sewed), 1840-45,
4_l._ 4_s._; Foxe's Acts and Monuments, by Townsend and Catley, 8 vols.
8vo. cloth, plates, 2_l._ 10_s._; ArchÃ¦ologia, or Miscellaneous Tracts
relating to Antiquity, Vols. 17 to 34, Part I. Index and Catalogue,
making 18 vols., 1 part, 4to., 12 vols. calf gilt, very neat, remainder
unbound, 1814-51, 8_l._ 8_s._; Vetus Testamentum ex Versione Septuaginta
Interp. edit. J. Breitingerus, 4 vols. 4to., calf neat, Tiguri, 1730,
2_l._ 2_s._; Nares' (Arch.) Glossary, 4to., calf gilt, 1822, 2_l._
2_s._; Novum Testamentum GrÃ¦cum Wetsteinii, 2 vols. folio, calf neat,
Amst., 1751, 5_l._ 5_s._; Poli Synopsis Criticorum Aliorumque S.
ScripturÃ¦ Interpretum, 5 vols. folio, calf neat, 1669, 5_l._ 5_s._;
Calmet, Dictionnaire Historique, Critique, Chronologique, &c., de la
Bible, plates, 4 vols. folio, calf, Paris, 1722, 2_l._ 10_s._; Hale's
(Dr.) New Analysis of Chronology, &c., 4 vols. 8vo. calf gilt, 1830,
3_l._ 3_s._; Virgilii Opera, &c., by Heyne, large paper, 6 vols. royal
8vo., russia, Lips., 1800, 2_l._ 10_s._; Euripidis Opera Omnia, Notis
Var., 9 vols. 8vo., calf gilt, Glasg., 1821, 2_l._ 15_s._; Works of the
British Poets, with Prefaces, &c. by R. Anderson, 13 vols. royal 8vo.
calf neat, contents lettered, 1795, 5_l._; Oratores Attici, Gr. et Lat.,
cum Notis Reiskii et Variorum, curavit Dobson, 16 vols. 8vo., calf gilt,
lettered contents, 4_l._ 10_s._; Stephani Thesaurus LinguÃ¦ GrÃ¦cÃ¦, cum
Glossaria LabbÃ¦i, 5 vols., and Scott's Appendix, 2 vols. in 1, together
7 vols., folio, 1672-1744, 3_l._ 3_s._; British Magazine and Monthly
Register of Eccles. Information, 22 vols. 8vo., half calf, neat, 1832 to
1842, while edited by the late Rev. Hugh Rose, 3_l._ 3_s._


14. Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.

  REDUCED IN PRICE.

  HUTTEN (ULRICH DE) OPERA QUÃ EXTANT OMNIA, with Introductions and
  Notes by E. MUENCH. 5 vols. 8vo. (pub. at 3_l._) for 18_s._

  EPISTOLÃ OBSCURORUM VIRORUM, the best Edition, Edited by E.
  MUENCH, uniform with Hutten's Works. 8vo. (published at 12_s._),
  5_s._

  DR. PAULI'S KING ÃLFRED. Koenig Ãlfred u. seine Stelle in der
  Geschichte Englands. 8vo. 6_s._

  LEGENDA AUREA, vulgo Historia Lombardica, dicta recens. T.
  GRAESSE. A thick 8vo. vol. 1846 (published at 22_s._ 6_d._), only
  6_s._

  The above are taken from WILLIAMS and NORGATE'S Second-hand
  Catalogue, No. IV., which will be sent post free for one stamp.

  WILLIAMS & NORGATE, 14. Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.


An unusually interesting and valuable Collection of Autograph Letters,
35,000 Franks, and numerous Literary Curiosities.

  PUTTICK AND SIMPSON, Auctioneers of Literary Property, will sell
  by Auction at their Great Room, 191. Piccadilly, on TUESDAY, March
  16, and two following days, a Collection of Autograph Letters, in
  the finest preservation, amongst which will be found those of
  English and Foreign Sovereigns, Noblemen, Statesmen, and
  Commanders, Oliver Cromwell and his adherents, Napoleon, his
  Family and Generals, Authors, Artists, Actors, Musicians, &c.,
  Ireland's Shakspeare papers, the author's own copy, with numerous
  specimens of the pseudo-original MSS., Southey's Madoc (the
  author's MS.), and many interesting literary curiosities.
  Catalogues will be sent on application (if in the country, on
  receipt of six stamps).


CURIOUS CUTTINGS FROM ANCIENT NEWSPAPERS, GAZETTES, MAGAZINES, &c.,
illustrative of the following English Counties, may be obtained from MR.
JAMES FENNELL, 1. WARWICK COURT, HOLBORN, LONDON, immediately upon the
receipt of a remittance for the prices here stated, viz.:
Bedfordshire--a parcel of highly interesting Cuttings (1724 to 1767),
some Prints, &c. 10_s._ 6_d._; Berkshire--very curious Cuttings (1670 to
1723), rare Views, Books, Deeds, &c., the entire parcel only 2_l._
2_s._; Cambridge Cuttings (1680 to 1850). Views and Pamphlets, 12_s._
6_d._; Cheshire Cuttings, old Play-bills, Prints, &c., 12_s._ 6_d._;
Cornwall Cuttings (1714 to 1805), and curious Chap-book, 5_s._ 6_d._;
Cumberland Cuttings (1762 to 1821), Maps, Views &c., 5_s._ 6_d._; Isle
of Man Cuttings, &c. (1765 to 1810), a very interesting collection,
10_s._ 6_d._; Derbyshire Cuttings (1730 to 1835), rare Views and
Pamphlets, 1_l._ 5_s._; Devonshire Cuttings, Pamphlets, Views, and
Portraits, 16_s._ 6_d._




Printed by Thomas Clark Shaw, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by George Bell, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, March 13. 1852.




      [Transcriber's Note: List of volumes and content pages in "Notes
      and Queries", Vol. I.-V.]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  88 | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No.  89 | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No.  90 | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No.  91 | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  92 | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No.  93 | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No.  94 | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No.  95 | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No.  96 | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov.  1, 1851      | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      | Vol. IV No. 106 | Nov.  8, 1851      | 361-374 | PG # 39091 |
      | Vol. IV No. 107 | Nov. 15, 1851      | 377-396 | PG # 39135 |
      | Vol. IV No. 108 | Nov. 22, 1851      | 401-414 | PG # 39197 |
      | Vol. IV No. 109 | Nov. 29, 1851      | 417-430 | PG # 39233 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 110 | Dec.  6, 1851      | 433-460 | PG # 39338 |
      | Vol. IV No. 111 | Dec. 13, 1851      | 465-478 | PG # 39393 |
      | Vol. IV No. 112 | Dec. 20, 1851      | 481-494 | PG # 39438 |
      | Vol. IV No. 113 | Dec. 27, 1851      | 497-510 | PG # 39503 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. V.                                   |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         |  Pages  | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. V  No. 114 | January  3, 1852   |   1- 18 | PG # 40171 |
      | Vol. V  No. 115 | January 10, 1852   |  25- 45 | PG # 40582 |
      | Vol. V  No. 116 | January 17, 1852   |  49- 70 | PG # 40642 |
      | Vol. V  No. 117 | January 24, 1852   |  73- 94 | PG # 40678 |
      | Vol. V  No. 118 | January 31, 1852   |  97-118 | PG # 40716 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. V  No. 119 | February  7, 1852  | 121-142 | PG # 40742 |
      | Vol. V  No. 120 | February 14, 1852  | 145-167 | PG # 40743 |
      | Vol. V  No. 121 | February 21, 1852  | 170-191 | PG # 40773 |
      | Vol. V  No. 122 | February 28, 1852  | 193-215 | PG # 40779 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. V  No. 123 | March 6, 1852      | 217-239 | PG # 40804 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      | INDEX TO THE FOURTH VOLUME. JULY-DEC., 1851    | PG # 40166 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. V, Number 124,
March 13, 1852, by Various

